Calmness of Mind

Shikantaza, our zazen, is Just to be ourselves. When we do not expect anything we can be ourselves. That is our way, to live fully in each moment of time. This practice continues forever.

  We say, "each moment," but in your actual practice a "mo-ment" is too long because in that "moment" your mind is already involved in following the breath. So we say, "Even in a snap of your fingers there are millions of instants of time." This way we can emphasize the feeling of existing in each instant of time. Then your mind is very quiet.

  So for a period of time each day, try to sit in shikantaza, with-out moving, without expecting anything, as if you were in your last moment. Moment after moment you feel your last instant. In each inhalation and each exhalation there are countless instants of time. Your intention is to live in each instant.

  First practice smoothly exhaling, then inhaling. Calmnes.~ of mind is beyond the end of your exhalation. If you exhale smoothly, without even trying to exhale, you are entering into the complete perfect calmness of your mind. You do not exist any-more. When you exhale this way, then naturally your inhalation
  
6	NOT	ALWAYS	SO

wiu start from there. All that fresh blood bringing everything from oUlside will pervade your body. You are completely refreshed. Then you start to exhale, to extend that fresh feeling into emptiness. So, moment after moment, without trying to do anything, you continue shikantaza.

  Complete shikantaza may be difficult because of the pain in your legs when you are sitting cross-legged. But even though you have pain in your legs, you can do it. Even though your practice is not good enough, you can do it. Your breathing will gradually vanish. You will gradually vanish, fading into empti-nes.~. Inhaling without effort you naturally come back to yourself with some color or form. Exhaling, you gradually fade into emptines.~-empty, white paper. That is shikalltaz..1. The impor-tant point is your exhalation. Instead of trying to feel yourself as you inhale, fade into emptines.~ as you exhale.

  When you practice this in your last moment, you will have nothing to be afraid of. You are actually aiming at emptiness. You become one with everything after you completely exhale with this feeling. If you are still alive, naturally you wiu inhale again. "Oh, I'm still alive! Fortunately or unfortunately!" Then you start to exhale and fade into emptiness. Maybe you don't know what kind of feeling it is. But some of you know it. By some chance you must have felt this kind of feeling.

  When you do this practice, you cannot easily become angry. When you are more interested in inhaling than in exhaling, you easily become quite angry. You are always trying to be alive. The other day my friend had a heart attack, and all he could do was exhale. He couldn't inhale. That was a terrible feeling, he said. At that moment if he could have practiced exhaling as we do, aiming for emptiness, then I think he would not have felt so bad. The great joy for us is exhaling rather than inhaling. When my friend kept trying to inhale, he thought he couldn't inhale any-
  
CAI.MNr,SS	OF	MINI>
7

more.	If he could have exhaled smoothly and completely, then I

think another inhalation would have come more easily.

  To take care of the exhalation is very important. To die is more important than trying to be alive. When we always try to be alive, we have trouble. Rather than trying to be alive or active, if we can be calm and die or fade away into emptin~'SS, then nat-urally we wiU be all right. Buddha will take care of us. Because we have lost our mother's bosom, we do not feel like her child anymore. Yet fading away into emptiness can feel like being at our mother's bosom, and we will feel as though she will take care of us. Moment after moment, do not lose this practice of shikantaza.

Various kinds of religious practice are included in this point.

When people say "NIIIIII' Alllidil B,IIslI, NIIIIIII AII/idll BIIISII," the want to be Amida Buddha's children. That is why they pratice

repeating Amida Buddha's name. The same is true with ourr zazen practice. If we know how to practice shikantaza, and if they know how to repeat Amida Buddha's name, it cannot be different.

  So we have enjoyment, we are free. We feel free to eXPress ourselves because we are ready to fade into emptiness. When We are trying to be active and special and to accomplish something, we cannot expres.~ ourselves. Small self will be expressed, but big self will not appear from the emptiness. From the emptiness onl great self appears. That is shikantaza, okay? It is not so difficult if you really try.

Thank you very much.

Express Yourself Fully

When you live completely in each moment, without expecting anything, you have no idea of time. When you are involved in an idea of time-today, tomorrow, or next year-selfish practice begins. Various desires stan to behave mischievously. You may think you should get ordained, or you worry about what your next step will be. Trying to become someone else, you lose your practice and lose your virtue. When you are faithful to your posi-tion or your work, your true being is there. This is a very impor-tant point.

  Without any idea of time, your practice goes on and on. Moment after moment you become you yourself. This practice is not so easy. You may not be able to continue it for even one period of meditation. You wiu need to make a big eff"ort. Then you can practice extending this feeling moment after moment. EvenlUaUy it will extend to your everyday life.

  The way to extend your practice is to expose yourself as you are, without trying to be someone else. When you are very hon-
  
EXPRESS	YOURSELF	FULLY	9

est with yourself and brave enough, you can express yourself fully. Whatever people may think, it is all right. Just be yourself, at least for your teacher. That is actual practice, your actual life. Unless you trust your teacher, this is rather difficult, but if you find out that your teacher's spirit is the same as your spirit, then you wiU be brave enough to continue practicing in this way.

  Sometimes you have to argue with your teacher. That is okay, but you should try to understand him and be ready to give up your argument - when you are wrong, when you find yourself foolishly sticking to one point of view, or when you are making some excuse. That is how to be honest with yourself. Then you can give up: "Okay, I surrender. I'm sorry."

  You and your teacher are aiming to have perfect communica-tion. For a teacher the important point is always to be ready to surrender to his disciple. When a teacher realizes he is wrong, he can say, "Oh, you are right, I was wrong." If your teacher has that kind of spirit, you will be encouraged to admit your mistake as well, even when it is not so easy. If you continue this kind of practice, people may say, "You are crazy. Something is wrong with you." But it doesn't maner.

  We are not the same. Each one of us is different, and each one of us has our own problems. Fortunately you have the support of others who are practicing with you. This is not an umbrella to provide shade to protect you but a space where you can have real practice, a space where you can express yourself fully. You can open your eyes to appreciate the practice of others, and you wiU find that you are able to communicate without words.

  Our way is not to criticize others but to know and appreciate them. Sometimes you may feel you know someone too well, and you have difficulty appreciating them because of your small mind. If you continue practicing together, and your mind is big
  
10	NOT	ALWAYS	SO

enough to expose yourself and 10 accept others, naturally you will become good friends. To know your friend is to know some-thing beyond yourself, beyond even your friend.

  You may say that when you are practicing zazen, no one can know your practice, but for me that is the best time to understand you. When you sit facing the wall and I see you from behind, it is especially easy to understand what kind of practice you have. Sometimes I walk around the meditation hall so that I can see you. This is very interesting. If you are dancing or talking or making a big noise, it is rather difficult to understand you. But when we are sitting together, you each sit in your own way.

  It is a big mistake to think that the best way to express yourself is to do whatever you want, acting however you please. This is not expressing yourself. When you have many pos.~ible ways of expressing yourself, you are not sure what to do, so you will behave superficially. If you know what to do exacdy, and you do it, you can express yourself fully.

  That is why we follow forms. You may think that you cannot express yourself within a particular form, but when we are all practicing together, strong people will expres.~ themselves in a strong way and kind people will express themselves kindly. When we pass the sutra cards along the row during service, you each do it in your own way. The differences among you are easy to see because the form is the same. And because we repeat the same thing over and over again, we can understand our friends' ways eventually. Even if your eyes are shut, you know, "Oh, that was so-and-so." This is the advantage of having rules and rituals.

  Without this kind of practice your relationships with people will be very superficial. If someone wears a beautiful robe (here he rubs his robe and laughs), you will think he must be a good priest. If someone gives you a beautiful thing, you will think she
  
EXPRESS	YOURSELF	fULLY	II

is very kind, that she is a wonderful person. That kind of under-standing is not so good.

  Usually our society works in a superficial, frivolous way. The controlling power is money or some big noise. Our eyes and ears are not open or subtle enough to see and hear things. Most peo-ple who visit Zen Center find it a strange place: "They do not talk so much. They do not even laugh. What are they doing?" Those who are accustomed to big noises may not notice, but we can communicate without talking so much. We may not always be smiling, but we feci what others are feeling. Our mind is always open, and we are expressing ourselves fully.

  We can extend this practice to city life and be good friends with one another. This is not difficult when you decide to be honest with yourself and express yourself fully, without expecting anything. Just being yourself and being ready to understand others is how to extend your practice into everyday life.

  We don't know what will happen. If you fail to express your-self fully on each moment, you may regret it later. Because you expect some future lime, you miss your opportunity, and you are misunderstood by your friend. Do not wait to express yourself fully.
Thank you very much.

Freedom from Everything

My practice of shikantaza or zazen changed about two years ago, after I almost drowned. I wanted to cross the creek at Tassajara. I cannot actually swim, but the students were enjoying the water so much, I thought I would join them. There were many beautiful girls over there so I tried to go over there, forgetting that I couldn't swim, and I almost drowned. But I knew I would not die.

  I knew I would not drown because there were many students, and someone would help me, so it was not so serious. But the feeling was pretty bad. I was swallowing water, so I stretched out my arms hoping that someone would catch me, but no one helped me. I decided to go to the bottom, to walk, but that was not possible either. I could not reach the bottom and I could not get above the surface. What I saw was the legs of beautiful girls. But I could not take hold of their legs, and I was rather scared.

  At that time I realized that we never have good practice until we become quite serious. Because I knew that I was not dying, I was not so serious, and because I was not so serious, I had a very difficult time. If I knew I was dying, I would not have struggled anymore. I would have stayed still. Because I thought I had another moment, I did not become serious. Since then my prac-tice has improved. Now I have confidence in my practice, so I have been teUing you how I sit in shikantaza.

  It was a very interesting experience. I was among beautiful girls, but the beautiful girls could not save me. And, as you know, I am dying because of my sickness, not because of water. When I am dying, various demons as well as beautiful women wiu be happy to be with me, and I wiu be very happy to be with them. Everything is with us, and without being disturbed, we are happy to be with everything. UsuaUy it is difficult to feci that \vay because we are involved in gaining ideas, expecting some im-provement in the future.

  When you are not thinking that you have another moment, then naturally you can accept things as they are, you can see things as they are. You wiu have perfect wisdom at that time. When you are able to sit, experiencing shikantaza, then the meaning of your everyday life will be completely different. You wiu have freedom from everything. That is the main point. Usually you have no freedom from the things you have or see, but when you experience shikantaza, you will have freedom from things. You wiu truly enjoy your life, because you are not attached to anything.

  You become really happy, and that happiness wiu continue, which is what we mean by non-attachment. Most of the happi-ness you have is the kind you later regret losing: "Oh, at that time I was happy, but now I am not so happy." Out real happiness will always be with you and wiu encourage you in both your adversity and your happiness. When you are successful, you will enjoy the success, and when you fail, it wiu also be okay. You can enjoy the feeling of failure: "Oh, this is pretty good - not as bad as I thought!" You will always have enough. You won't want too much, as you did before.

   If you come to a great difficulty, like a big mountain in Nepal that looks like it has no passageway, you will know there is a way to get through. Even a hundred-day sesshin is not difficult. Even though you die, nothing happens. It is okay. So you are always happy, and you will not be discouraged. And the kind of life you choose will be different. Before you have right practice, you may want something big and beautiful: the number-one Zen-practice monastery in the United States, in the world - even better than in Japan. But afterwards, the things you choose and the way of life you follow will be different.

  Sometimes I give pretty serious lectures. I put emphasis on difficult, hard practice: "Don't expect the next moment." "Don't move!" I am sorry, but I have to say this because your practice looks so weak, and I want to make you stronger. Actually, it is okay that your practice is not so good, but if you are not strict enough with yourself, and if you lack confidence, then zazen can-not be zazen. It doesn't work. What makes your practice go deeper and deeper is the day-by-day effort of sitting.

  In China and Japan there are many stories of teachers who attained enlightenment suddenly like this: "Ump"''' [laughs and snaps his fingers) You may think it was sudden, but actually it was the result of many years of practice and of failing many times. Dogen Zenji's famous words concerning this are, "Hitting the mark is the result of ninety-nine failures." The last arrow hit the mark, but only after ninety-nine failures. So failure is actually okay.

  Each time you shoot, shoot with confidence. Then you are sure to hit the mark. "Ninety-nine failures are okay. I will con-tinue to try to hit the mark." Each time you sit, do your best.
  
You may think that zazen is cros..~ing your lcgs for forry minutes, but the most importam poim is to put all your effort, physical and spiritual, into it.

  Concentrate on your breath. When your breathing is not appropriate, it is hard to do any physical work. Even when you sew, your breathing should follow your activiry. When you lift somcthing heavy, your breathing should be completely harmo-nized, or else you cannot lift it. It is not so easy to have good breathing. You will need good posture and a good mudra [ritual hand posture I because your mudra is a symbol of your memal state. If your spine is not straight, your breathing will not be deep enough. Of course, it takes time to develop all of your mental and physical effort.

  Enlightenment does not come until your mind and body are in perfect accord. If you cannot accept your experience, you won't feel you have enlightenmem. In other words, when your mind and body are completely one, then enlightenment is there. Whatcver you hear, whatever you think, that is enlightenmem. So it is not the sound of a stonc hitting bamboo or thc color of plum blossoms that makes people enlightened. It is their practice. In your everyday lifc you always have opportunities for enlight-enment. If you go to the rest room, there is a chance to attain enlightenment. When you cook, there is a chance to attain en-lightenmem. When you clean the Roor, there is a chance to attain enlightcnmem.

  So whatever you do, just do it, without expecting anyone's help. Don't spoil your elTort by seeking for shelter. Protect your-self and grow upright to the sky; that is all. That's all, but it is a little bit unusual, isn't it? Maybe we are crazy. Some people may think that we are crazy, and we may think they are crazy. It's okay. We will find out pretry soon who is crazy.

Thank you very much.

Why do we practice Zen when we already have Buddha nature? This was the great question that Dogen Zenji worked on before he went to China and met Tendo Nyojo Zenji. This is not an easy problem, but first of all what does it mean when we say everyone has Buddha nature?

  The usual understanding is that Buddha nature is something innate within ourselves, and because of this nature, we do some-thing. If there is a plant, there must be a seed that was there before the plant appeared. Because of their natures, some Rowers are red and some Rowers are yellow. Most of us understand in that way, but that is not Dogen's understanding. That kind of nature is an idea you have in your mind.

  Why would we practice when we already have Buddha nature? We may think that Buddha nature will appear only after we prac-tice and eliminate various selfish desires.

  According to Dogen Zenji though, that kind of understanding is based on your unclear observation of things. His understand-ing is that only when something appears is its Buddha nature reality. Sometimes we say Buddha nature. Sometimes we say enlightenment or bodhi, Buddha or attainment. We caU Buddha nature not only by these names, but sometimes we caU it "evil desires." We may say evil desires, but for Buddha, that is Buddha nature.

  In the same way some people may think that laypeople and priests are fundamentaUy different, but actuaUy there is no partic-ular person who is a priest. Each one of you could be a priest, and I could be a layperson. Because I wear a robe I am a priest, and I behave like a priest. That's aU. There is no innate nature that distinguishes priest from layperson.

  Whatever you caU it, that is another name of one reality. Even though you caU it a mountain or a river, that is just another name of the one reality. When we realize this, we are not fooled by words like 'nature,' 'result,' or 'Buddhahood.' We see things them-selves with a clear mind. We understand Buddha nature in this way.

  "Evil desires" is another name for Buddha nature. When we practice zazen, where would evil desires come from? In zazen there is no place for evil desires. StiU we may believe that evil desires should be eliminated. Why is that? You want to elimi-nate your evil desires in order to reveal your Buddha nature, but where wiu you throw them away? When we think that evil desires are something we can throw away, that is heretical. Evil desires is just a name we use, but there is no such thing that we can separate out and throwaway.

  You may feel as if I am fooling you, but it is not so. It is no laughing matter. When we come to this point, it is necessary to understand our practice of shikantaza.

  There is a famous koan about a man who climbs to the top of a loo-foot pole. If he stavs at the ton pole, he may be the enlightened one. How we understand this koan is how we understand our practice. The reason we believe that evil desires should be thrown out is because we stay at the top of the pole. Then we have a problem. Actually there is no top of the pole. The pole continues forever, so you cannot stop there. But when you have some experience of enlightenment, you may think that you can rest there, observing variolls sights from the top of the pole.

  Things are continuously growing or changing into something else. Nothing exists in its own form or color. When you think that "Here is the top," then you wiu have the problem of whether or not to jump ofT. But you cannot jump off from here. That is already a misunderstanding. It is not possible. And even though you try to stop at the top of the pole, you cannot stay there be-cause it is growing continuously.

  That is the problem, so forget all about stopping at the top of the pole. To forget about the top of the pole is to be where you are right now. Not to be this way or that way, not to be in the past or the future, but to be right here. Do you understand? This is shikantaza.

  Forget this moment and grow into the next. That is the only way. For instance, when breakfast is ready, my wife hits some wooden clappers. If I don't answer, she may continue to hit them until I feel rather angry. This problem is quite simple-it is becallse I don't answer. If I say "Hail" ["Yes!"], there is no prob-lem. Because I don't say "Yes!" she continues to caU me because she doesn't know whether or not I heard her.

  Sometimes she may think, "He knows, but he doesn't answer." When I don't answer, I am on the top of the pole. I don't jump off. I believe I have something important to do at the top of the pole: "You shouldn't call me. You should wait." Or I may think, "This is very important! I am here, on the top of the pole! Don't you know that?" Then she will keep hitting the clappers. That is how we create problems.

  So the secret is just to say "Yes!" and jump off from here. Then there is no problem. It means to be yourself in the present moment, always yourself, without sticking to an old self. You for-get aU about yourself and are refreshed. You are a new self, and before that self becomes an old self, you say "Yes!" and you walk to the kitchen for breakfast. So the point on each moment is to forget the point and extend your practice.

  As Dagen Zenji says, "To study Buddhism is to study yourself. To study yourself is to forget yourself on each moment." Then everything will come and help you. Everything will assure your enlightenment. When I say "Yes!" my wife will assure my en-lightenment. "Oh, you are a good boy!" But if I stick to this, "I am a good boy," I will create another problem.

  So on each moment just concentrate and really be yourself. At this moment, where is Buddha nature? Buddha nature is when you say "Yes!" That "Yes!" is Buddha nature itself. The Buddha nature which you think you already have within yourself is not Buddha nature. When you become you yourself, or when you forget all about yourself and say "Yes!" that is Buddha nature.

  This Buddha nature is not something that will appear in the future, but something that is already here. If you have only an idea about Buddha nature, it doesn't mean anything. It is a painted rice cake, not an actual one. If you want to see an actual rice cake, you should see it when it is here. So the purpose of our practice is just to be yourself. When you become just yourself, you have real enlightenment. If you try to hold onto what you attained previously, that is not actual enlightenment.

  Sometimes you will laugh at yourself when you faU into wrong practice. "Oh, what am I doing?" When you understand how practice goes back and forth, you will enjoy your practice. Real compassion or love, real encouragement or true courage will arise from here, and you will be a very kind person. We say, "One practice covers everything," which means that practice includes many virtues like the waves of the sea. When you practice in this way, you become like a stone, a tree, or an ocean. You cover everything. Continuous practice is necessary, so do not rest. How to continue is to have generous mind, big mind, and soft mind -to be flexible, not sticking to anything. Practicing in this way there is no need to be afraid of anything, or to ignore anything. That is strictness of the Way. When we are not afraid of anything, we are imperturbable.

  To be completely concentrated on what you do, that is sim-plicity. And the beauty of practice is that it can be extended end-lessly. You cannot say that our way is quite easy or that it is very difficuh. It is not difficuh at all. Everyone can do it, but to con-tinue it is rather difficult. Don't you think so?

Thank you very much.
You become very serious when you have a big problem, withour realizing that you are always creating problems. With a smaller problcm, you think, "Oh, this is no trouble, so [ can manage it quite easily." You may think this without even knowing how you will cope with the problem you have.

  The other day Tatsugami Roshi said, "A tiger catches a mouse with his whole strength." A tiger does not ignore or slight any small animal. The way he catches a mouse and the way he catches and devours a cow are the same. But usually, although you have many problems, you think they are minor, so you don't think it is necessary to exert yourself.

  That is the way many countries treat their international prob-lems: "This is a minor problem. As long as we do not violate international treaties, it will be okay. As long as we do not use atomic weapons, we can fight." But that kind of small fight even-tually will result in a big fight. So even though the problems you have in your everyday life are small, unless you know how to solve them you will have big difficultics. This is the law of karma. Karma starts from small things, bur with neglect your bad karma will accelerate.
  
   Recently I read some of Buddha's teaching about the Way: "Brethren, restrain your many desires while receiving food and drink, accept it as medicine. Do not accept or reject it based on what you like or dislike. Just support your bodies and avoid star-vation and thirst. As a bee in gathering honey tastes the Rower, bill does not harm its color or scelll, so brethren, you may accept just enough of people's offerings to avoid distres.•. Don't have many demands and thereby break their good hearts. Wise men, for example, having judged the capacity of their animals' strength, do not wear them oU[ by overloading them."

  "To restrain your many desires" is not really a maner of big or small, many or few. The idea is to go beyond desires. To have few desires means not to divide our concelllration among too many things. To do things with oneness of mind, with true-hearted spirit - that is to have few desires.

  "While receiving food and drink, accept it as medicine." This means to be concelllratcd, accepting it with your whole body and mind, without any dualistic idea of "you" and "food." So we "receivc" or "accept" food rather than saying that we "take" food. Taking is more dualistic. Accepting is a more complete activity. You may think that "to takc" is a more complete action than "to accept." But according to Buddha's teaching, to grasp or take food does not include complete acccptance. Because it is dualis-tic, you will create karma. You may wish to grasp it because some other person walliS to take it, so you must be very quick! Bill when you receive it, already you have it, and if you accept it with great appreciation -"Thank you very much"-that is what Bud-dha mea III as the truc activity of restraining your desires.

   "1)0 not accept or reject it based on what you like or dislike." Again, to accept or reject in this way is dualistic. This kind of teaching does not mcan to have control over your desires. If you want to cOlllrol your desires, you will struggle with how much to
  
limit your desires or your food, and in that way you will make more problems, one after another. You may even find some good excuse to have more food. Then you will lose your way.

  "Just support your bodies and avoid starvation and thirst." If you know how to practice zazen, then you will know how much food to take, and there is no danger of eating too much or too little.

  "As a bee in gathering honey tastes the flower but does not harm its color or scent." This is a very famous parable. When we take honey because the flower is beautiful or the scent is nice, we miss the true taste of the flower. When you are laking care of yourself and Ihe flower, you can have a direct feeling of the flower and raSle its honey. Often we are not so careful. We may ruin a beauliful flower or we may stick to a parlicular flower. If we stick 100 much, eventuaUy the flower wiU die. The purpose of the flower having honey is to help the plant by inviting bees. So it is necessary to know whether we are like a bee or like something else. When we are aware of the difficulties that we sometimes create, we can extend our practice more carefully Ihroughoul our everyday life.

  Our minds should be more careful, more attenlive, and more refleclive. You may think our way has too many rules about how to treat things. But before you know what you are doing, you cannot say there are 100 many rules. So nOlice whether you are creating problems in your everyday life or creating bad karma for yourself and for olhers. And you should also know why you suf-fer right now. There is a reason why you suffer, and it is not possible to escape from suffering unless you change your karma.

  When you follow karma and drive karma in a good direction, you can avoid Ihe deslructive nature of karma. You can do that by being attentive to the nature of karma and the nature of your desires and activities. As Buddha pointed out, to know the cause of suffering is to know how to avoid suffering. If you study why you sutffer, you will understand cause and effect, and how bad actions result in bad effects. Because you understand, you can avoid the destructive power of karma.

  As long as we have an idea of self, karma has an object to work on, so the best way is to make karma work on the voidness of space. If we have no idea of self, karma doesn't know what to do - "Ohhh, where is my partner, where is my friend?" Some people try hard to banish karma, but I don't think that is possible. The best way is to know the strict rules of karma and to work on our karma immediately.

  If you know something is wrong with your car, stop your car immediately and work on it. But usually we don't. "Oh, this is a minor problem for my car. It is still running. Let's go." That is not our way. Even though we can keep driving, we should take care of our car very carefully. If you push your car to the limit, the problems are constantly working on your car, until finally it stops. Now it may be too late to fix it, and it will require a lot more energy.

  So everyday care is very important. Then you can get rid of your misunderstandings and know what you are actually doing.

Thank you very much.
If you go to a library you will see many books, and you can find out about our human knowledge that is so vast it is almost impos-sible to study. Now someone is going to land on the moon. ActuaUy I don't know anything about how we are reaching the moon or what kind of feeling we will have when someone arrives there. To me it is not such an interesting thing.

  I want to speak about the moon trip, but I have not had any time to study it. So if I talk about the moon trip you may think, "He is so ignorant." People I see today or tomorrow may speak about the moon trip as if they know everything about it. If I hear them speak about the moon trip, and I feel that they are not really interested, I may not respect them so much.

  The first one to arrive on the moon may be very proud of his achievement, but I do not think he is a great hero. I don't know


26	NOT	ALWAYS	SO

how you feel, but I don't feel that way. On television he may be a great hero for a time and be treated that way for his achieve-ment. If we think about this, we immediately know how impor-tant it is to practice zazen. Instead of seeking for some success in the objective world, we try to experience the everyday moments of our life more deeply. That is the purpose of zazen.

  One time Marian [Derby) showed me some sand. When she gave it to me, she said, "These are very interesting stones." It just looked like sand, but she asked me to look through a magnifying glass. Then those small stones were as interesting as the stones I have in my office. The stones in my office are bigger, but under the glass the sand was quite similar.

  If you say, "This is a rock from the moon," you wiu be very much interested in it. Actually I don't think there is a great dif-ference between rocks we have on the earth and those on the moon. Even if you go to Mars, I think you will find the same rocks. I am quite sure about it. So if you want to find something interesting, instead of hopping around the universe like this, enjoy your life in every moment, observe what you have now, and truly live in your surroundings.

  Yesterday I went to visit an island owned by the Nature Con-servancy where there are many kinds of animals, birds, and fish. It was a very interesting place. If you live in an area like that and really start to see things, to see the plants and animals in that area, you may want to stay there your whole life. It is such an interest-ing place. But we human beings go hopping around, ignoring many interesting things. We may even travel to the moon or beyond. It is rather foolish. If you stay in one place, you can enjoy your life completely. That is a more human life.

  When we go to the moon I am not sure we are following the best direction for human beings. I don't know what we are doing. When we find the spirit of zazen, we find the way of life
  
~NJ()Y  YOUR  LIFE	27

to follow as a human being. In other words, we are not fooled by things or fooled by some particular idea. Dogen Zenji at fir.;[ refused to receive an honorary purple robe from the Emperor. After he turned it down a second time the Emperor said, "You must receive it." So finally he accepted it. But he didn't wear it, and he wrote to the Emperor saying, "I very much appreciate your purple robe, but I do not dare wear it, because if I wore it, the birds and monkeys on this mountain would laugh at me."

  In meditation we sometimes practice counting our breath. You may think it is siUy to count your breath from one to ten, los-ing track of the count and starting over. If you use a computer, there wiu not be any mistake. But the underlying spirit is quite important. While we are counting each number, we find that our life is limitlessly deep. If we count our breath in the ordinary way, as we would count the distance from here to the moon, our practice doesn't mean anything.

  To count each breath is to breathe with our whole mind and body. We count each number with the power of the whole uni-verse. So when you really experience counting your breath, you wiu have deep gratitude, more than if you arrived on the moon. You wiu not be so interested in something just because it is con-sidered great, or uninterested in something usually considered to be small.

  StiU you may be very interested in having new experiences the way a baby is. A baby has the same basic attitude of interest towards all things. If you watch her, she will always be enjoying her life. We adults mosdy are caught by our preconceived ideas. We are not completely free from the objective world, because we are not one with the objective world.

  Things change. For the usual person this is very discouraging. You cannot rely on anything. You cannot have anything. And you will see what you don't want to see. You will meet someone
  
18	NOT	ALWAYS	SO

you don't like. If you want to do something, you may find that it is impossible. So you will be discouraged by the way things are going. As a Buddhist you are changing the foundation of your life. "That things change" is the reason why you suffer in this world and become discouraged. When you change your under-standing and your way of living, then you can completely enjoy your new life in each moment. The evanescence of things is the reason why you enjoy your life. When you practice in this way, your life becomes stable and meaningful.

  So the point is to change your understanding of life and to practice with the right understanding. To arrive on the moon may be a great, historical event, but if we don't change our under-standing of life, it won't have much meaning or make much sense. We need to have a deeper understanding of life.

  We say there is a Rinzai way and a Soto way, Hinayana practice and Mahayana practice, Buddhism and Christianity. But if you practice any of these as though you are hopping around the uni-verse, it will not help much. If you have right understanding in your practice, then whether you take a train, an airplane, or a ship, you can enjoy your trip. If you go to Japan by boat, it may take ten days, and by airplane, maybe ten hours. But if the point is to enjoy your trip, time is not a concern. Even though you make a trip by airplane, you cannot live a thousand years. You only live one hundred years at most. And you cannot repeat your life. So you cannot compare your life with any other life.

  The only way is to enjoy your life. Even though you are prac-ticing zazen, counting your breath like a snail, you can enjoy your life, perhaps even more than taking a trip to the moon. That is why we practice zazen. The most important thing is to be able to enjoy your life without being fooled by things.

Thank you very much.

Walk like an Elephant
All the teachings come from practicing zazen, where Buddha's mind is transmitted to us. To sit is to open up our transmitted mind, and all the treasures we experience come from this mind. To realize our true mind or transmitted mind, we practice zazen.

  Many people seek for a special place, and become confused. As Dogen Zenji says, "Why give up your own seat and wander about in the dusry realms of foreign countries?" When we are sightseeing, we are involved in an idea of hasry attainment. Our way is to go step by step, appreciating our everyday life. Then we can see what we are doing where we are.

  People often think it would be best to study Zen in Japan, but this is rather difficult. "Why don't you stay at Zen Center?" I ask them. If you go to Japan, mostly you wiu encourage them to build more new buildings. They may be very happy to see you, but it is a waste of time and money, and you wiu be discouraged because you cannot find a good Zen master. Even if you find a teacher, it wiu be difficult to understand him and to study with him.

You can do true zazen practice here, watching yourself step by

)0	NOl	AI.WAYS	SO

step, one step ~fier another. We pmctice like a cow rather than a horse. Instead of b'3l1oping about, we walk slowly, like a cow or an elephant. If you can walk slowly, without any idea of gain, then you are already a good Zen student.

  In China at the end of the Sung Dynasty many Zen masters, responding to their students' desires, encoumged them to attain sudden enlightenmcnt using various psychological means. It may not be a trick - I shall be scolded if I say trick - but I feel that kind of pmctice is something like a trick. So those Zen masters would be good friends with the psychologists who try to explain the enlightcnment experience. But originally Zen was com-pletely different from this kind of pmctice.

  Dogen Zeryi makes this point strongly, referring to a story about the first ancestor in China, Bodhidharma, and the second ancestor Taiso Eka. Bodhidharma tells Eka, "If you want to enter our prnctice, cut yourself off from outward objects and stop your emotional and thinking activity within. When you become like a brick or stone wall, you will enter the Way."

  For Eka, this was a very difficult pmctice, as you must have experienced, but he tried very hard until he finally thought he understood what Bodhidharma meant. Then Eka told Bodhi-dharma that there was no break, no gap in his pmctice, never any ces.o;ation of pmctice. And Bodhidharma said, "Then who are you? Who does constant pmctice?" Eka said, "Because I know myself very well, it is difficult to say who I am." And Bodhid-hanna said, "That's right. You are my disciple." Do you under-stand?

  We do not pmctice zazen to attain enlightenment, but mther to express our true nature. Even your thinking is an expression of your true nature when you are prncticing zazen. Your thinking is like someone talking in the backyard or across the street. You
  
WALK	LIKE	AN	I:LEPliANT	JI

may wonder what they are talking about, but that someone is not a particular person. That someone is our true nature. The true nature within us is always talking about Buddhism. Whatever we do is an expression of Buddha nature.

  When Eka, the second ancestor, came to this point, he told Bodhidharma that he thought he understood: "A stone wall itself is Buddha nature; a brick is also Buddha nature. Everything is an expression of Buddha nature." I used to think that after attaining enlightenment, I would know who is in the backyard talking, but there is no special person hidden within who is explaining a spe-cial teaching. All the things we see, all that we hear, is an expres-sion of Buddha nature. When we say Buddha nature, Buddha nature is everything. Buddha nature is our innate true nature, which is universal to everyone of us, to all beings.

  In this way we realize our true nature is constantly doing something. So Eka says that there is no cessation in practice because it is Buddha's practice, which has no beginning and no end. Then who is practicing that kind of practice? Personally he may be Eka, but his practice is constant and everlasting. It started in the beginningles.~ past and will end in the endles.~ future. So it is difficult to say who is practicing our way.

  When we practice zazen, we are practicing with all the ances-tors. You should clearly know this point. You cannot waste your time, even though your zazen is not so good. You may not even understand what it is, but someday, sometime, someone will accept your practice. So just practice without wandering, with-out being involved in sightseeing zazen. Then you have a chance to join our practice. Good or bad doesn't matter. If you sit with this understanding, having conviction in your Buddha nature, then sooner or later you will find yourself in the midst of great Zen masters.
  
P NOT  ALWAYS  SO

  So the important point is to practice without any idea of a hasty gain, without any idea of fame or profit. We do not prac-tice zazen for the sake of others or for the sake of ourselves. Just practice zazen for the sake of zazen. Just sit.

Thank you very much.

Letters from Emptiness

Letters from Emptiness

Shikantaza is to practice or actualize emptiness. Although you can have a tentative understanding of it through your thinking, you should understand emptiness through your experience. You have an idea of emptiness and an idea of being, and you think that being and emptiness are opposites. But in Buddhism both of these are ideas of being. The emptiness we mean is not like the idea you may have. You cannot reach a full understanding of emptiness with your thinking mind or with your feeling. That is why we practice zazen.

  We have a term sl.osokll, which is about the feeling you have when you receive a letter from home. Even without an actual picture, you know something about your home, what people are doing there, or which flowers are blooming. That is sl.osokll. Although we have no actual written communications from the world of emptiness, we have some hints or suggestions about what is going on in that world - and that is, you might say, enlightenment. When you see plum blossoms, or hear the sound
  
36 NOT  ALWAYS  SO

of a small stone hitting bamboo, that is a letter from the world of emptiness.

  Besides the world which we can describe, there is another kind of world. All descriptions of reality are limited expressions of the world of emptiness. Yet we attach to the descriptions and think they are reality. That is a mistake because what is described is not the actual reality, and when you think it is reality, your own idea is involved. That is an idea of self.

  Many Buddhists have made this mistake. That is why they were attached to written scriptures or Buddha's words. They thought that his words were the most valuable thing, and that the way to preserve the teaching was to remember what Buddha said. But what Buddha said was just a letter from the world of empti-ness,just a suggestion or some help from him. If someone else reads it, it may not make sense. That is the nature of Buddha's words. To understand Buddha's words, we cannot rely on our usual thinking mind. If you want to read a letter from the Bud-dha's world, it is necessary to understand Buddha's world.

  "To empty" water from a cup does not mean to drink it up. "To empty" means to have direct, pure experience without rely-ing on the form or color of being. So our experience is "empty" of our preconceived ideas, our idea of being, our idea of big or small, round or square. Round or square, big or small don't belong to reality but are simply ideas. That is to "empty" water. We have no idea of water even though we see it.

  When we analyze our experience, we have ideas of time or space, big or small, heavy or light. A scale of some kind is neces-sary, and with various scales in our mind, we experience things. Still the thing itself has no scale. That is something we add to reality. Because we always use a scale and depend on it so much, we think the scale really exists. But it doesn't exist. If it did, it would exist with things. Using a scale you can analyze one
  
LETT~HS  fROM   F.MPTINF.SS	37

reality into entities, big and small, but as soon as we conceptualize something it is already a dead experience.

  We "empty" ideas of big or small, good or bad from our expe-rience, because the measurement that we use is usually based on the self. When we say good or bad, the scale is yourself. That scale is not always the same. Each person has a scale that is differ-ent. So I don't say that the scale is always wrong, but we are liable to use our selfish scale when we analyze, or when we have an idea about something. That selfish part should be empty. How we empty that part is to practice zazen and become more accustomed to accepting thillgs as it is without any idea of big or small, good or bad.

  For artists or writers to express their direct experience, they may paint or write. But if their experience is very strong and pure, they may give up trying to describe it: "Oh my." That is all. I like making a miniature garden around my house, but if I go to the stream and see the wonderful rocks and water running, I give up: "Oh, no, I shall never try to make a rock garden. It is much better to clean up Tassajara Creek, picking up any paper or fallen branches."

  In nature itself there is beauty that is beyond beauty. When you see a part of it, you may think this rock should be moved one way, and that rock should be moved another way, and then it will be a complete garden. Because you limit the actual reality using the scale of your small self, there is either a good garden or a bad garden, and you want to change some stones. But if you see the thing itself as it is with a wider mind, there is no need to do any-thing.

  The thing itself is emptiness, but because you add something to it, you spoil the actual reality. So if we don't spoil things, that is to empty things. When you sit in shikantaza, don't be disturbed by sound~, don't operate your thinking mind. This means not to
  
38 NOT  ALWAYS  SO

rely on any sense organ or the thinking mind and just receive the letter from the world of emptiness. That is shikamaza.

  To empty is not the same as to deny. Usually when we deny something, we want to replace it with something else. When I deny the blue cup, it means I want the white cup. When you argue and deny someone else's opinion, you are forcing your own opinion on another. That is what we usually do. Hut our way is not like that. By emptying the added element of our self-centered ideas, we purify our observation of things. When we see and accept things as they are, we have no need to replace one thing with another. That is what we mean by "to empty" things.

  If we empty things, lening them be as ;t ;s, then things will work. Originally things are related and things are one, and as one being it will extend itself. To let it extend itself, we empty things. When we have this kind of attitude, then without any idea of religion we have religion. When this attitude is missing in our religious practice, it will naturally become like opium. To purify our experience and to observe tlr;IIgs as ;t ;s is to understand the world of emptiness and to understand why Buddha left so many teachings.

  In our practice of shikantaza we do not seek for anything, be-cause when we seek for something, an idea of self is involved. Then we try to achieve something to further the idea of self. That is what you are doing when you make some effort, but our effort is to get rid of self-centered activity. That is how we purify our experience.

  For instance, if you are reading, your wife or husband may say, "Would you like to have a cup of tea?" "Oh, [am busy," you may say, "don't bother me." When you are reading in that way, I think you should be careful. You should be ready to say, "Yes, that would be wonderful, please bring me a cup of tea." Then you stop reading and have a cup of tea. After having a cup of tea, you continue your reading.
  
LETTF.RS	FROM	~MPTINESS	39

  Otherwise your attitude is, "I am very busy right now!" That is not so good, because then your mind is not actuaUy in fuU func-tion. A pan of your mind is working hard, but the other part may not be working so hard. You may be losing your balance in your activity. If it is reading, it may be okay, but if you are making cal-ligraphy and your mind is not in a state of emptines.~, your work will teU you, "I am not in a state of emptiness." So you should stop.

  If you are a Zen student you should be ashamed of making such caUigraphy. To make caUigraphy is to practice zazen. So when you are working on calligraphy, if someone says, "Please have a cup of tea," and you answer, "No, I am making calligra-phy!" then your calligraphy will say, "No, no!" You cannot fool yourself.

  I want you to understand what we are doing here at Zen Center. Sometimes it may be aU right to practice zazen as a kind of exercise or training, to make your practice stronger or to make your breathing smooth and natural. That is perhaps included in practice, but when we say shikantaza, that is not what we mean. When we receive a letter from the world of emptiness, then the practice of shikantaza is working.
Thank you very much.

Brown Rice is just Right

How do you like zazen? I think it may be better to ask, how do you like brown rice? Zazen is too big a topic. Drown rice is just right. Actually, there is not much difference. When you eat brown rice, you have to chew it, and unless you chew it, it is dif-ficult to swallow. When you chew it very well, your mouth becomes part oC the kitchen, and actually the brown rice becomes more and more tasty. When we eat white rice, we don't chew so much, but that little bit of chewing feels so good that naturally the rice goes right down our throats.

  When we digest food completely, what will become of it? It will be transformed, changing its chemical nature, and will per-meate our whole body. In the process it dies within our body. To eat and digest food is natural to us, as we are always changing. This organic proces.~ is called "emptiness." The reason we call it emptiness is that it has no special Corm. It has some form, but that form is not permanent. While it is changing, it carries on our life energy.

  We know that we are empty, and also that this earth is empty. The forms are not permanent. You may wonder, "What is this
  
BROWN	RICE	IS	JUST	RIGHT	41

universe?" Dut this universe has no limit. Emptiness is not something you can understand through a space trip. Emptiness can be understood when you are perfectly involved in chewing rice. This is actual emptiness.

  The most important point is to establish yourself in a true sense, without establishing yourself on delusion. And yet we can-not live or practice without delusion. Delusion is necessary, but delusion is not something on which you can establish yourself. It is like a stepladder. Without it you cannot climb up, but you don't stay on the stepladder. With this confidence, you can con-tinue to study our way. That is why I say, "Don't run away. Stick with me." I do not mean, "Stick to me." I mean stick with your-self, not with delusion. Sometimes I may be a delusion. You may overestimate me: "He is a good teacher!" That is already a kind of delusion. I am your friend. I am just practicing with you as your friend who has many stepladders.

  We shouldn't be disappointed with a bad teacher or with a bad student. You know, if a bad student and a bad teacher strive for the truth, something real will be established. That is our zazen. We must continue to practice zazen and continue to chew brown rice. EventuaUy, we will accomplish something.
Thank you very much.

The Zen of Going

to the Rest Room

How do you feel right now? Ilaughs) I don't know how you feel, but I feel as if I have just come out of the rest room. As I am pretty old, I go to the rest room often. Even when I was young, I went to the rest room more often than others, and sometimes I had an advantage because of that. When I went to Eiheiji Monastery and sat Idllgaryo [a period of continuous sitting for several days, required for entering a Zen monastery), I could go to the rest room without a guilty conscience, because I had to! I was so happy to go to the rest room. I think that going to the rest room is a good way to look at our practice.

  Zen master Unullon may have been the first to make a connection between our practice and the rest room. "What is your practice? What is Buddha?" someone asked him. He answered, "Toilet paper." Actually, nowadays it is toilet paper, but he said, "Something to wipe yourself with in the rest room." That is what he said. And since then many Zen masters are
  
TifF.	ZEN	Of	GOING	TO	THE	REST	ROOM	43

thinking about it, practicing with the koan: What is toilet paper?

What did he mean by that?

  In our everyday life, we eat many things, good and bad, fancy and simple, tasty and not so tasty. Later we need to go to the rest room. Similarly after filling our mind, we practice zazen. Other-wise our thinking will eventually become very unhealthy. It is necessary for us to make our mind clear before we study some-thing. It is like drawing something on white paper; if you do not use clean white paper, you cannot draw what you want. So it is necessary to go back to your original state where you have noth-ing to see and nothing to think about. Then you will understand what you are doing.

  The more you practice zazen, the more you will be interested in your everyday life. You will discover what is necessary and what is not; what part to correct and what part to emphasize more. So by practice you will know how to organize your life. This is to observe your situation accurately, to clear your mind and begin from your original starting point. This is like going to the rest room.

  Our culture is based on the idea of gaining or accumulating ·something. Science, for instance, is the accumulation of knowl-edge. I don't know that a modern scientist is greater than a scientist in the sixteenth century. The difference is that we have accumulated our scientific knowledge. That is a good point and at the same time dangerous. We are in danger of being buried under aU of our accumulated knowledge. It is like trying to sur-vive without going to the rest room. We are already swimming in the pond of polluted water and air, and we talk about this pol-lution. At the same time we can hardly survive the pollution of our knowledge.

  Each one of us knows how to go to the rest room without attaching to something we have in our bodies. When we realize
  
44	NOT	AI.WAYS	SO

that we already have everything, we wiU not be attached to anything. Actually, we have everything. Even without going to the moon, we have it. When we try to go to the moon, it means that we think the moon is not ours.

  Our mind, as Buddha told us, is one with everything. Within our mind, everything exists. If we understand things in this way, then we will understand our activity. To study something is to appreciate something. To appreciate something is to be detached from things. When we become detached from things, everything will be ours. Our practice is to realize this kind of big mind; in other words, to go beyond each being including ourselves, and let our self work as it works. That is zazen practice. When we prac-tice zazen, we actually clean up our various attachments.

  We are very much afraid of death. But when we are mature enough, we understand that death is something that should hap-pen to us. If you die when you are young, that is a terrible thing. If I die, it is not such a terrible thing, either for me or for you, because I am mature enough to die. I understand my life pretty well, what it is to live one day and what it is to live one year, and what it is to live sixty or one hundred years. So anyway, when you become mature and experienced, having eaten many things in this life, I think you will be happy to die,just as you are happy to go to the rest room. It happens in that way.

  An old person, eighty or ninety, hasn't many problems. Physi-cally, old people may suffer, but that suffering is not as big a thing as you think. When people are young they think about death as something terrible, so when they are dying they continue to think that. But actually, it isn't. There is some limit to our capacity to endure physical suffering. And mentally there is a limit to our capacity, but we think it is limitless. We have limitless suffering because we have limitless desire. That kind of desire, as Buddha says, creates our problems. We are accumulating our problems one after another with limitless desire, so we have bottomless fear.
  
TIIF.	ZF.N	OF	GOING	TO	TJlfi	R~ST  ROOM	45

  Actually, when we know how to clear up our mind, we will not have as many problems. Just as we go to the rest room every day, we practice zazen every day. [n monastic life, the best prac-tice is to clean the rest room. Wherever you go, whichever monastery you go to, you will always find a special person clean-ing the rest room. We do not clean our rest room just because it is dirty. Whether it is clean or not, we clean the rest room, until we can do it without any idea of clean or dirty. When that is so, it is actually our zazen practice. To extend this practice to every-day life may seem difficult, but actually it is quite simple. Our laziness makes it difficult, that's aU. That is why we put emphasis on endurance, to continue our practice. There should not be any cessation of practice; practice should go on, one moment after another.

  Some students who practice zazen very hard are liable to ignore everyday life. [f someone auaillS enlightenment, they may say,. "[ have auained enlightenment under a great Zen master, so whatever [ do is okay. [ have complete freedom from good and bad. Only those who do not have an enlightenment experience stick to the idea of good and bad." Speaking in that way is to ignore everyday life. They do not take care of their life. They do not know how to organize their life or know what kind of rhythm they should have. To know the rhythm of our lives is to understand what we are doing. [t is necessary to sec our activity with a clear mind, through zazen experience.

  [ came to America because in Japan [ had too many problems. I'm not sure, but perhaps that is why I came to America. When [ was in Japan, [ didn't practice zazen as [ do here. Now [ have very different problems than I had in Japan. Even though I am practicing zazen with you, my mind is like a garbage can. Even though I am in America, which is called a free country, my mind is like a garbage can. I am a Japanese and [ have many Japanese friends here, so [ have the problems most Japanese have, in addi-
  
46	NOT	AI.WAYS	SO

tion to other problems. Sometimes I wonder what I am doing here. Uut when I know what I am doing clearly, without any overestimation or underestimation, very honestly and truly, I do not have much burden on my mind. Zazen practice especially has been a great help. If I hadn't been practicing zazen, I wouldn't have survived in the way I did. I started my practice when I was quite young. But even more, I started my practice in its true sense after I came to San Francisco.

  You may have a pretty difficult time with me. I know that what I am doing is challenging for you. But this effort to under-stand things from another angle is not possible without conunu-nicating with people who are brought up in a different cultural background. To understand things just from a self-centered per-sonal or national viewpoint is our weakness, and when we do that we cannot develop our culture in its true sense. When our cul-ture comes to this point, the only way to make it healthy is to par-ticipate in the cultural activities of various human beings. Then you will understand yourself better, as I understand myself and zazen better since I came to San Francisco.

   When you understand yourself better and others better, you can just be yourself. Just to be a good American is to be a good Japanese, and just to be a good Japanese is to be a good American. Because we stick to Japanese way or American way, our mind becomes like a wastepaper basket. If you notice this point, you will understand how important it is to practice zazen. Fortu-nately or unfortunately, even though you don't like it, we need to go to the rest room, the stinky rest room. I am sorry, but I think we have to go to the rest room, as long as we live.

  If I were younger,l would sing a Japanese folk song right now, about the rest room.

Thank you very much.

Caring for the Soil

Most of us study Buddhism as though it were something that was already given to us. We think that what we should do is preserve the Buddha's teaching, like putting food in the refrigerator. Then to study Buddhism we take the food out of the refrigerator. Whenever you want it, it is already there. Instead. Zen students should be interested in how to produce food from the field. from the garden. We put the emphasis on the ground.

  AU of us have Buddha nature. and the teachings that grow from Buddha nature are similar to one another. The teachings of dif-ferent schools of Buddhism do not differ so much. but the atti-tude towards the teaching is different. When you think that the teaching is already given to you then. naturally. your effort wiu be to apply the teaching in this conullon world. For instance. Ther-avada students apply the teaching of the twelve Links of Causa-tion [ignorance. will. mind. name and form. six senses. contact. acceptance. love. attachment. being. birth. death] to our acruallife. to how we were born and how we die. Mahayana understanding is that the original purpose of this teaching. when Buddha told it. \vas to explain the interdependency of different beings.

Buddha  tried  to  save  us  by  destroying  our conunon  sense.

48	NOT	ALWAYS	SO

UsuaUy we are not interested in the nothingness of the ground. Our tendency is to be interested in something that is growing ill the garden, not in the bare soil itself. nut if you want to have a good harvest the most important thing is to make the soil rich and to cultivate it weU. The Buddha's teaching is not about the food itself but about how it is grown, and how to take care of it. Buddha was not interested in a special deity or in something that was already there; he was interested in the ground from which various gardens wiU appear. For him, everything was holy.

  Buddha did not think of himself as a special persoll. He tried to be like the most conunon persoll, wearing a robe, begging with a bowl. He thought, U[ have many students because the students are very good, not because of me." Buddha was great because his understanding of people was good. necause he understood peo-ple he loved them, and he enjoyed helping them. Because he had that kind of spirit, he could be a Buddha.

Thank you very much.

Everyday Life is like a Movie

I think most of you are rather curious about what Zen is. Zen is actually our way of life. and to practice zazen is like setting your alarm clock. Unless you set your alarm. the clock will not serve its purpose. Every day we must have a starting point. The sun rises at a certain time and sets at a certain time. always repeating the same thing. And we do too, but it may not feel that way to us. Unless our life is organized. we may not realize how impor-tant it is to know where to start our life.

  As Zen students our life begins with zazen practice. We come back to zero and start from zero. Although we have various activ-ities. the most important thing is to realize how these activities arise from zero. At the moment you decide to sit. it means that you have already set your alarm. When you have enough confi-dence to make the decision to start practicing zazen, that is zero.

  During zazen you may hear a bird singing. Something is aris-ing in your practice. In the same way in our everyday life many things will arise, and if you know where these things arise from,
  
50	NOT	ALWAYS	SO

you will not be disturbed by them. Because you don't know how it happens, you become confused. If you know how things arise, then at the moment something happens you will be ready: "Oh, something is arising." It is like watching the sunrise: "Oh look, the sun is just coming up."

  For instance sometimes you will be angry, but anger actuaUy doesn't come aU of a sudden. It may come very slowly. When you feel anger come all of a sudden,that is real anger. Dut when you know how it comes-"anger is arising in my mind"-that is not anger. People may say that you are angry, but actually you are not angry. If you know you are about to start crying, "Oh, I am going to cry," and then in the next rwo or three minutes, "Oh,1 started crying," that is not crying. Our practice is to accept things as you accept various images in your siuing. The most importam thing is to have big mind and to accept things.

  If you practice zazen to obtain enlightenmem, it will be like using an alarm clock without selling the time. II will go ofT any-way, but it doesn't make much sense. To sit every morning at a certain time makes sense. To know what you are doing at any particular time is the most importam thing. This is to make efTort according to the situation you are in.

  Our everyday life is like a movie playing on the wide screen. Most people are imerested in the picture on the screen without realizing there is a screen. When the movie stops and you don't see anything anymore, you think, "I must come again tomorrow evening." (Iaughsl ". will come back and see another show." When you are just imerested in the movie on the screen and it ends, then you expect another show tomorrow, or maybe you are discouraged because there is nothing good on right now. You don't realize the screen is always there.

  BUI when you are practicing, you realize that your mind is like a screen. If the screen is colorful, colorful enough to auract
  
EVERYDAY	I.HE	IS	LIKE	A	MOVIF.	51

people, then it will not serve its purpose. So to have a screen which is not colorful-to have a pure, plain white screen - is the most important point. But most people are not interested in the pure white screen.

  I think it is good to be excited by seeing a movie. To some extent you can enjoy the movie because you know that it is a movie. Even though you have no idea of the screen, still your interest is based on an understanding that this is a movie with a screen and there is a projector or something artificial. So you can enjoy it. That is how we enjoy our life. If you have no idea of the screen or the projector, perhaps you cannot see it as a movie.

  Zazen practice is neces.~ary to know the kind of screen you have and to enjoy your life as you enjoy movies in the theater. You are not afraid of the screen. You do not have any particular feeling for the screen, which is just a white screen. So you are not afraid of your life at aU. You enjoy something you are afraid of. You enjoy something that makes you angry or makes you cry, and you enjoy the crying and the anger too.

  If you have no idea of the screen, then you will even be afraid of enlightenment: "What is it?" "Oh, my!" naughterJ If some-one attains enlightenment, you may ask him about the experience that he had. When you hear about the experience, you may say, "Oh, no! That is not for me." But it is just a movie you know, something for you to enjoy. And if you want to enjoy the movie you should know that it is the combination of film and light and screen, and that the most important thing is the plain white screen.

  That white screen is not something that you can actually attain; it is something you always have. The reason you don't feel you have it is because your mind is too busy. Once in a while you should stop all your activities and make your screen white. That is zazen. That is the foundation of our everyday life and our
  
s~	NOT	ALWAYS	SO

meditation practice. Without this kind of foundation your prac-tice will not work. All the instructions you receive are about how to have a clean white screen, even though it is never pure white because of various attachments and previous stains.

  When we just practice zazen with no idea of anything, we are quite relaxed. Because it is difficult to have complete relaxation in our usual posture, we take the posture of zazen. To do this we follow the instructions that have been accumulated from the experience of many people in the past. They discovered that the posture of zazen is much better than other postures, better than standing up or lying down. If you practice zazen following the instructions, it will work. But if you do not trust your own pure white screen, your practice will not work.

Thank you very much.

Resuming Big Mind

The purpose of sesshin is to be completely one with our practice. We use two Chinese characters for sessl,ill. &ISII [which shortens to ses in conjunction with slrill] means to treat something the way you treat a guest or the way a student treats his teacher. Another meaning of selSll is to control or to arrange things in order. SI,ill means mind or heart. So sessl,ill means to have proper function-ing of mind. It is our five senses and our will, or smaU monkey mind, which should be controUed. When we control our mon-key mind we resume our true big mind. When monkey mind is always taking over the activity of big mind, we naturaUy become a monkey. So monkey mind must have its boss, which is big mind.

  However, when we practice zazen, it is not that big mind is actually controUing smaU mind, but simply that when smaU mind becomes calm, big mind starts its true activity. Most of the time in our everyday life, we are involved in the activity of small mind. That is why we should practice zazen and be completely involved in resuming big mind.

A good example of our practice  is a turtle, which  has  four

54 NOT  ALWAYS  SO

legs, a head, and a tail- six parts of the body which are sometimes outside of the shell and sometimes inside. When you want to eat or go somewhere, your legs are out, but if they are always out, you will be caught by something. In case of danger, you draw in your legs, head, and tail. The six parts refer to the five senses and the mind. This is sesshin. For one week, our head, tail, and legs are inside the shell. In the scriptures it says that even demons cannot destroy us if the six parts of our body are inside the shell.

  In zazen we do not try to stop thinking or cut off hearing and seeing. If something appears in your mind, leave it. If you hear something, hear it, and just accept it. "Oh"-that is all. No sec-ond activity should appear in your zazen. Sound is one activity. The second activity is, "What is that sound - is it a motor car or garbage truck or something?" If you hear a sound, that is all-you hear it. Don't make any judgment. Don't try to figure out what it is. Just open your ears and hear something. Just open your eyes and see something. When you are sitting for a pretty long time, watching the same place on the waU, you may see var-ious images: "It looks like a river," or "it looks like a dragon." Then you may think that you should not be thinking, but you see various things. DweUing on the images may be a good way to kill time, but it is not sesshin.

  To be concentrated on something may be important, but just to have a weU-concentrated mind is not zazen. It is one of the elements of practice, but calmness of mind is also necessary, so don't intensify the activity of the five sense organs. Just leave them as they are. That is how to free your true mind. When you can do so in everyday life you will have a soft mind. You won't have many preconceived ideas, and the bad habits in your way of thinking will not be overpowering. You will have generous mind and big mind, and what you say will help others.
  
RF.SUMIN(;	RIG	MIND	55

  For example, in the Silobogfllzo-z//i/llo//ki Dogen Zenji tells a story, which was told to him, about an influential person, Ichijo Motoie. One day Motoie discovered that his sword was missing, and since no one else could have broken imo his house, one of his own men must have stolen it. The sword was found and brought back to him, but Motoie said, "This is not my sword, so give it back to the one who owns it." People knew that the man who had the sword was the one who had stolen it, but because Motoie didn't accuse him of it, no one could say anything, so nothing happened. This is the calmness of mind we should have, accord-ing to Dogen.

  If we have generous, big mind, and if we have a strong spirit of practice, then there is no need to worry. Dogen emphasized a sparse, simple life. Without expecting anything, we just practice our way. Many students asked how it would be possible to sup-port the temple or group without any plan, and he said, "If it becomes difficult to support our temple, we will think about it, but until then, it is not neces..<;ary to think about it." So before something happens, it is not our way to think about it too much. In that way we have complete calmness of our mind. Because you have something, you worry about losing it, but if you don't have anything, there is no need to worry.

  One night Dogen said, "Even if you think a teaching is com-plete and right, when someone tells you a better way, you should change your understanding." In this way, we improve our under-standing of the teaching forever. Because you think it is right at that time, you follow the theory or rules, but you also have some space in your mind to change your idea. That is soft mind.

   It is possible to change your ideas because you know what kind of monkey your thinking is. Sometimes you follow the monkey's suggestion -"Oh yeah, that's right. If we go in that direction, we
   
56	NOT	ALWAYS	SO

may get sOllie food. Okay, let's go!" But when you see a better way to go, you may say, "Oh monkey, it may be better to go this way!" If you stick to your greed or anger or some other emo-tion, if you stick to the thinking mind, your monkey mind, you cannot change. Your mind is not soft.

  So in our practice, we rely on something great, and sit in that great space. The pain you have in your legs or some other diffi-culty is happening in that great space. As long as you do not lose the feeling that you are in the realm of Buddha nature, you can sit even though you have some difficulty. When you want to escape from your difficulty, or when you try to improve your practice, you create another problem Cor yourself. But if you just exist there, then you have a chance to appreciate your surroundings, and you can accept yourself completely, without changing any-thing. That is our practice.

  To exist in big mind is an act of faith, which is different from the usual faith of believing in a particular idea or being. It is to believe that something is supporting us and supporting all our activities including thinking mind and emotional feelings. All these things are supported by something big that has no form or color. It is impossible to know what it is, but something exists there, something that is neither material nor spiritual. Something like that always exists, and we exist in that space. That is the feel-ing of pure being.

  If you are brave enough to throw yourself into zazen for seven days, a little bit of understanding will help your rigidity and your stubbornness. Almost aU the problems you create because of your stubborn mind will vanish. If you have even the smaUest understanding of reality, your way oC thinking will change com-pletely, and the problems you create will not be problems any-more. But it is also true that as long as we live we will have
  
RESUMING	OJ(;	MIND	57

problems. So we don't practice zazen to attain some big enlight-enment that will change our whole being or solve all our prob-lems. That is not the right understanding. That may be what people call "Zen," but true Zen is not like that.

   In sesshin, we concentrate on having the experience of true practice. Forgetting all about any idea of gaining anything, we just sit here. If this room is too cold, we will make it warm, and if your legs become painful, you can stretch them. And if it is too difficult, you can rest, but let's continue our practice for these seven days.
Thank you very much.

Ordinary Mind, Buddha Mind
The point of my talk is to give you some support for your prac-tice. There is no need for you to remember what I say. If you stick to it, you stick to the support, not the tree il~e1f. A tree, when it is strong, may still want some support, but the most important thing is the tree itself, not the support.

  I am one tree, and each one of you is a tree. You should stand up by yourself. When a tree stands up by itself, we call that tree a Buddha. In other words, when you prnctice zazen in its true sense, you are really Buddha. Sometimes we call it a tree and sometimes we caU it a Buddha. "Buddha," "tree," or "you" are many names of one Buddha.

  When you sit. you are independent from various beings. and you are related to various beings. And when you have perfect composure in your practice. you include everything. You are not just you. You are the whole world or the whole cosmos. and you are a Buddha. So when you sit. you are an ordinary human. and you are Buddha. Before you sit. you may stick to the idea that
  
ORIlINARY	MINn.	DunnHA	MINn	59

you are ordinary. So when you sit you are not the same being as you arc before you sit. Do you understand?

   You may say that it is not possible to be ordinary and holy. When you think this way, your understanding is one-sided. In Japanese, we caU someone who understands things from just one side a Itllllbtlll-ktlll. "someone who carries a board on his shoul-der." Because you carry a big board on your shoulder, you can-not see the other side. You think you are just an ordinary human, but if you take the board off, you wiu understand, "Oh, I am Buddha, too. How can I be both Buddha and an ordinary human? It is amazing!" That is enlightenment.

  When you experience enlightenment, you will understand things more rreely. You won't mind whatever people caU you. Ordinary mind? Okay, I am ordinary mind. Buddha? Yes, I am Buddha. How do I come to be both Buddha and ordinary mind? I don't know, but actually I am Buddha and ordinary mind.

  Buddha, in its true sense, is not different from ordinary mind. And ordinary mind is not something apart from what is holy. This is a complete understanding or our selr. When we practice zazen with this understanding, that is true zazen. We will not be bothered by anything. Whatever you hear, whatever you see, that wiu be okay. To have this feeling, it is necessary to become accus-tomed to our practice. If you keep practicing, you will naturally have this understanding and this feeling. It will not be just intel-lectual. You will have the actual feeling.

  Even though someone can explain what Buddhism is, if he does not have the actual feeling, we cannot caU him a real Bud-dhist. Only when your personality is characterized by this kind of feeling can we caU you a Buddhist. The way to become char-acterized by this kind of understanding is to always concentrate on this point. Many koans and sayings bring out this point.
  
60	NOT	II LWAYS	SO

Ordinary mind understands things dualistically, but even though we are doing what we usually do, that is actually Buddha's activ-ity. Buddha's mind, Buddha's activity, and our activity are not different.

  Someone may say that "such and such" is Buddha's mind, and "thus and so" is ordinary mind, but there is no need to explain it in that way. When we do something, we cannot say, "I am doing something," because there is no one who is independent from others. When I say something, you will hear it. I cannot do any-thing by myself, just for myself. If someone does something, everyone will be doing something. Moment after moment, we continue our activity, which is Buddha's activity. But you cannot say that this is just Buddha's activity, because you are actually doing something too. Then you may say "I," but we don't know what "I" that is. You try to say who is doing what, because you want to intellectualize your activity, but before you say anything, the actual activity is present. Who you are is here.

  Our activity is both cosmic and personal, so there is no need to explain what we are doing. We may want to explain it, but we should not feel uneasy if we cannot, because it is impossible to understand. Actually, you are here, right here, so before you understand yourself, you are you. After you explain, you are not really you anymore. You just have an image. But usually you will stick to the image which is not you, and you will ignore the reality. As Dogen Zenji said, we human beings allach to some-thing that is not real and forget all about what is real. That is actually what we do. If you realize this point, you will have per-fect composure, and you can trust yourself. Whatever happens to you, it doesn't mailer. You trust yourself, and this is not the usual trust or belief in what is not real.

  When you are able to sit without any image or any sound, with an open mind, that is true practice. When you can do that, you
  
ORDINARY	MIND,	BUDDIIA	MIND	(,1

are free from everything. Still it is aU right for you to elUoy your life, moment after moment, because you arc not enjoying your life as something concrete and eternal. Our life is momentary, and, at the same time, each moment includes its own past and future. In this way our momentary and eternal life will continue. This is how we actually lead our everyday life, how we enjoy our every-day life, and how we have freedom from variolls difficulties.

  I was sick in bed for a long time, and I was thinking about these things. I was just practicing zazen in bed. I should enjoy being in bed. [laughing) Sometimes it was difficult, but then I laughed at myself, "Why is it so difficult? Why don't you enjoy your diffi-culties?"

That is, I think, our practice.

Thank you very much.

Practicing Zen
/elllal al/i",de. "

Supported from Within

In our service after reciting a sutra, we offer a prayer to dedicate the merit. According to Dogen Zenji we are not seeking for help from outside because we are firmly protected from inside. That is our spirit. We are protected from inside, always, incessantly, so we do not expect any help from outside. Actually it is so, but when we recite the sutra, we say a prayer in the usual way.

  In one of our dedications of merit we say, "May the two ~heels [the Dharma wheel and the material wheel] of the temple go smoothly and may the calamities which the country and the temple may face, calamities like war, epidemic, famine, fire, water, and wind, be averted." Although we say this, actually the spirit is different. We do not observe our way, or recite our sutra to ask for help. That is not our spirit. When we recite the sutra, we create the feeling of non-duality, perfect calmness, and strong conviction in our practice.

  If that kind of feeling is always with us we will be supported. If we become involved in dualistic, selfish practice, to support our building or organization, or to support our personal life, there is not much feeling in our sitting or our chanting. When we have
  
M. NOT   AI.WAYS   SO

strong confidence in our way and do not expect anything, we can recite the sutra with a deep cairn feeling. That is our actual practice.

  Dogen Zenji also says that we do not have any idea of dirty or pure, or any idea of calamity or disaster, but even so, we have the practice of cleaning the rest room. Even though your face, or mouth, or body is clean, when you get up you should wash your face and clean your mouth. If you think cleaning the rest room is dirty work, that is the wrong idea. The rest room is not dirty. Even though you don't clean it, it is clean, or more than clean. So we clean it as a practice, not because it is dirty. If you do it because it is dirty, that is not our way.

  Our belief is that if the Dharma wheel is turning then the material wheel will be turning too. If we are not supported by anyone, it means our Dharma wheel is not actuaUy going. This is Dogen Zenji's understanding, and I have tested whether it is true or not, especiaUy during the war when I did not have much to eat.

  Most priests worked to earn some money to support them-selves and their families. My belief was that if I observed the Buddhist way faithfully, people would support me. If no one supported me it would mean that Dogen's words were not true. So I never asked anyone to give me anything. I just observed the Buddhist way without working as a teacher or as a clerk in the town office.

  I raised some vegetables and sweet potatoes in my temple gar-den. That is why I know how to raise vegetables pretty well. I had a spacious garden in front of the temple, so I dug up the ground, took out all the stones, and put in manure. Some vil-lagers came and helped me, and we grew vegetables, and we had a good crop.

  One day my neighbor came to help me cook. When she opened the rice box, there was no rice at all. I had a pretty big
  
SUPPORTED	FROM	WITHIN	('7

rice box. She was astounded, so she brought me some rice. It was only a little, as she didn't have much rice, but then my neigh-bors and members of my temple coUected rice. I had quite a few members, so I had quite a lot of rice. When people found out that I had a lot of rice they came to the temple, so I gave my rice to them. The more I gave my rice to them, the more rice I was given.

  At that time most people who lived in the city went to the farming families and exchanged whatever possessions they could for food: potatoes, rice, sweet potatoes, or pumpkin. But I had no such difficulty. Most of the time I had plenty of food, but I didn't feel so good eating something different from other people, so I tried to eat the same food as they did. Here at Tas.~ajara the foC'd is wonderful, strong and rich, in comparison to the food we had in wartime. So I have not had any complaint about the food. If we observe our way strictly we will surely be protected by Buddha. We will trust people, and we will trust Buddha.

  Since the war, Japanese priests have started to wear Western suits, giving up their Buddhist robes, unless they are performing a funeral or memorial service. I don't feel so good about that, so I always wear my robes. When I was coming to America, almost aU the priests who were going abroad wore good suits and shiny shoes. They thought that in order to propagate Buddhism they had to be like the American people. But their heads were not shiny. Their hair was pretty long and weU combed, rather than shaved 01T. But even though they buy the best suits and the best shoes, Japanese are Japanese. They cannot be American people, and American people will find some fault in the way they wear their suits or shoes. That is one reason why I didn't come to America in a suit.

  Another reason was that I was disappointed with priests who changed their robes into suits to support themselves, when Dogen
  
68 NOT  ALWAYS  SO

said we are firmly protected from within. That is our spirit when we say, "We pray that the Dharma wheel and the material wheel go smoothly forever." This kind of ceremony is a way to repay the benevolence of the Buddha and arhats. Buddha and the arhats are people who supported themselves by depending only on their practice. If we pay full respect to the arhats by practic-ing with the same spirit they did, we will also be protected.

  Dogen says, "If we do not practice our way with everyone, with all sentient beings, with everything in the world, on the cos-rnic stage, that is not the Buddhist way." The spirit of zazen prac-tice should always be with us, especially when we recite sUlras or observe ceremonies. It is not a dualistic or selfish spirit, but is calm and deep, with firm conviction.

  When we practice in that way, we are always one with the whole Buddha world, where there is no karmic activity, and our everyday life will be protected by the kind of power which per-vades everywhere. What is going on in the world of Buddha is just Buddha activity. There is nothing but Buddha activity in the realm of the Dharma world. In that way, we do not create any karma. We are beyond the karmic world. With this spirit and this understanding we observe our way.

  If we are too involved in the idea of time or taking care of the material world, we will lose our way. A priest will not be a priest when he is completely involved in dualistic practice, involved in a busy life in the busy, mundane world. Then there are no more priests. Even though priests are there, they are not practicing the priest's way. So Buddhists should be Buddhists completely. When a Buddhist really becomes a Buddhist he will be supported as a Buddhist.

Thank you very much.

Open Your Intuition

The purpose of sesshin is to develop stable practice. In sesshin we do not communicate with words, but being with each other is still a big encouragement. Verbal communication tends to be super-ficial, but when you don't speak, deeper communication between you wiU be encouraged, and your mind will become very subtle. Staying silent will open your intuition. Just to stay here without speaking for five days is already very meaningful. That is why we do not talk.

  When you are involved in a superficial conversation based on a passing interest, your true feeling will be covered. So to open your innate nature and to feel something from the bottom of your heart, it is necessary to remain silent. Through this kind of practice you will have a more intuitive understanding of the teaching. Not to talk does not mean to be deaf and dumb, but to listen to your intuition.

  The same is true with reading. When you become interested in something you are reading, your intuition does not tend to
  
70	NOT	ALWAYS	SO

open. That is why we don't read during sesshill. It doesn't mean to confine yourself in the dark, but by not reading you will encourage your intuition to open.

  Even if you are doing koan practice, it is not neces.'kIry to speak or to read. Especially for beginners it may be difficult to remain silent or not to read the newspapers. You may feel very bored (laughs), but you should continue your practice. In ses.~hin, everything will be taken care of by the old students, who will help the newer students to practice deeply.

  Just sit, and see what happens. Try to keep the right posture, according to the instructions, and follow the rules. Following the rules lets you find yourself. The rules let you know what time it is, when to eat, and how to walk. If there are no rules, and no one is taking care of you, it is rather difficult to practice. So the rules will be a great help. It is much better than not having any rules and sitting in a corner of the room five days without doing any-thing. The rules are not something to restrict you, but something to support your practice.

  There are various ways to practice: following the breath, counting the breath, or koan practice. This time I recommend following the breath. When you find it difficult to follow the breath, then counting the breath will be a help. Then you will know exactly what you are doing. If your practice gets lost, you will notice immediately.

  When you practice following the breath, don't make too much effort to make your breathing slow down or deepen, or anything like that. If you just follow your breath, then naturally your breathing will be appropriate for your practice, even though you don't adjust it.

  Various instructions will be given to you to help your practice. We do not give instructions in order to force you to do some
  
OP~N YOUR  INTUITION	71

special  practice.	It does  not  mean  you  should do  this, or you

shouldn't do that.	You Illay have various instructions, but practice

is up to you.

Thank you very much.

Find Out for Yourself

In your zazen or in your life you will have many difficuhies or problems. When you have a problem, see if you can find out for yourself why you have a problem. Usually you will try to solve your difficulty in the best way as soon as possible. Rather than studying for yourself, you ask someone why you have a problem. That kind of approach may work well for your usual life, but if you want to study Zen, it doesn't help.

  The moment you are told something by someone and you think you understand. you will stick to it, and you will lose the full function of your nature. When you seek something, your true nature is in full activity, as if you are feeling for your pillow in the dark. If you know where the pillow is, your mind is not in full function. Your mind is acting in a limited sense. When you are seeking for the pillow without knowing where it is, then your mind is open to everything. In this way you will have a more subtle attitude toward everything, and you will see Illillgs as il is.

If you want to study something, it's better not to know what

HND	OUT	FOR	YOURSELF	73

the answer is. Because you are not satisfied with something you are told, and because you cannot rely on anything set up by some-one else, you study Buddhism without knowing how to study it. In this way you find out for yourself what we reaUy mean by "Buddha nature," "practice;' or "enlightenment."

  Since you seek freedom, you try various ways. Of course you will sometimes find that you have wasted your time. If a Zen master drinks sake, you may think the best way to attain enlight-enment is to drink sake. But even though you drink a lot of sake, as he does, you will not attain enlightenment. It may look like you've wasted your time, but that attitude is important. If you continue to try to find out in that way, you will gain more power to understand things. Whatever you do, you will not waste your time.

  When you do something with a limited idea, or with some definite purpose, what you will gain is something concrete. This will cover up your inner nature. So it is not a matter of what you study, but a matter of seeing II'ill~s (IS il is, and accepting Il,illgs (IS

il is.

  Some of you may study something only if you like it. If you don't like it, you ignore it. That is a selfish way, and it also limits your power of study. Good or bad, small or big, we study to dis-cover the true reason why something is so big and why something is so small; why something is so good and why something is not so good. If you try to discover only something good, you will miss something, and you will always be limiting your faculties. When you live in a limited world, you cannot accept IlJillgs (IS il is.

  Even if a Zen master had just two or three students, he would never tell them our way in detail. The only way to study with him is to eat with him, talk with him, and do everything with him. You help him without being told how to help him. Mostly he will not seem to be very happy, and he will always be scolding
  
74	NOT	AI-WAYS	SO

you without any apparent reason. Because you cannot figure out the reason, you will not be so happy and he will not be so happy. If you reaUy want to study with him, you will study how to please him, how to make your life with him a happy one.

  You may say that this way of practice is very old-fashioned. It may be so, but I think you had this kind of life in Western civi-lization too, although not exactly as we did in Japan. The reason why people had a difficult time with their teachers is that there is no particular way for us to study. Each one of us is different from the other. So each one of us must have our own way, and, according to the situation, we should change our way. You can-not stick to anything. The only thing to do is to discover the appropriate way to act under new circumstances.

  For instance, in the morning we clean. We don't have enough rags or brooms, so it is almost impossible to participate in our cleaning. Under these circumstances it is stiU possible to figure out something to do. I don't scold you very much, but if I were a strict Zen master I would be very angry with you, because you give up quite easily: "Oh, no, there is not much cleaning equip-ment," or, "There is nothing for me to do." You are prone to think this way and easily give up. In such a case, please try hard to figure out how to practice. If you are very sleepy, you may think, "It's better to rest." Yes, sometimes it is better, but at the same time it may be a good chance to practice.

  When I was at Eiheiji assisting my teacher, he did not tell us anything, but whenever we made a mistake he scolded us. The usual way to open sliding doors is to open the one on the right, but when I opened it that way, I was scolded: "Don't open it that way! Not that side!" So the next morning I opened the other side and got scolded again. I didn't know what to do. Later I found out that the day I opened the right side his guest was on the right side, so I should have opened the other side. Before open-
  
fiNn	OUT	FOR	VOURsnLF	7S

ing the door, I should have been careful to find out which side his guest was on.

  The day I was appointed to serve him, I gave him a cup of tea. Usually you fiU eighty percent of the cup. Since that is the rule, I filled eighty percent, or seventy percent, and he said, "Give me hot tea. Fill the cup with very hot strong tea." So the next morning when there were some guests, I filled aU the cups with hot strong tea, almost ninety-nine percent and served them. I was scolded! Actually there is no rule. He himself liked very hot, bit-ter tea, fiUed to the brim, but almost aU the guests didn't like hot, bitter tea. For him I should serve bitter, hot tea, and for the guests I should otTer tea the usual way.

  He never told us anything. When I got up twenty minutes earlier than the wake-up beU, I was scolded, "Don't get up so early! You will disturb my sleep." Usually, if I got up earlier, it was good, but for him it was not so good. When you try to understand things better, without any rules or prejudice, this is the meaning of seIAessnes.~. You may say that something is a "rule," but rules are already a selfish idea. Actually there are no rules, so when you say, "This is the rule," you are forcing something, the rules, on others.

  Rules are only needed when we don't have much time, or when we cannot help others more closely in a kind way. To say, "This is the rule, so you should do it;' is easy, but, actually, that is not our way. For the beginner, maybe, instruction is necessary, but for advanced students we don't give much instruction, and they tryout various ways. If possible, we give instruction to people one by one. Because that is difficult, we give group instruction or a lecture like this. But don't stick to the lecture. Think about what I reaUy mean.

  I feel sorry that I cannot help you very much. But the way to study true Zen is not verbal. Just open yourself and give up
  
76	NOT	ALWAYS	SO

everything. Whatever happens, whether you think it is good or bad, study closely and see what you find out. This is the funda-mental auilUde. Sometimes you will do things without much reason, like a child who draws pictures whether they are good or bad. If that is difficult for you, you are not actuaUy ready to prac-tice zazen.

  This is what it means to surrender, even though you have nothing to surrender. Without losing yourself by sticking to a particular rule or understanding, keep finding yourself, moment after moment. This is the only thing for you to do.

Thank you very much.

Be Kind with Yourself

I want you to have the actual feeling of true practice, because even though I practiced zazen when I was young, I didn't know exactly what it was. Sometimes I was very impressed by our practice at Eiheiji and other monasteries. When I saw great teachers or listened to their lectures, I was deeply moved. But it was difficult to understand those experiences.

  Our aim is to have complete experience or full feeling in each 11).0ment of practice. What we teach is that enlightenment and practice are one, but my practice was what we caU stepladder Zen: "I understand this much now, and next year," I thought, "I will understand a little bit more." That kind of practice doesn't make much sense-I could never be satisfied. If you try stepladder practice, maybe you too will realize that it is a mistake.

  If we do not have some warm, big satisfaction in our practice, that is not true practice. Even though you sit, trying to have the right posture and counting your breath, it may still be lifeless zazen, because you are just following instructiollS. You are not kind enough with yourself. You think that if you follow the instructions given by some teacher, then you will have good
  
78	NOT	ALWAYS	SO

zazen, but the purpose of instruction is to encourage you to be kind with yourself. Do not count your breaths just to avoid your thinking mind but to take the best care of your breathing.

  If you are very kind with your breathing, one breath after another, you will have a refreshed, warm feeling in your zazen. When you have a warm feeling for your body and your breath, then you can take care of your practice, and you will be fully sat-isfied. When you are very kind with yourself, naturally you will feel like this.

  A mother will take care of her child even though she may have no idea how to make her baby happy. Similarly, when you take care of your posture and your breathing, there is a warm feeling in it. When you have a warm feeling in your practice, that is a good example of the great mercy of Buddha. Whether you are a priest or a layperson, this practice wiu extend to your everyday life. When you take the utmost care of what you do, then you feel good.

  Tozan Ryokai attained enlightenment many times. Once when he was crossing a river he saw himself reflected in the water and composed a verse, "Don't try to figure out who you are. If you try to figure out who you are, what you understand wiu be far away from you. You wiu have just an image of yourself." Actually, you are in the river. You may say that is just a shadow or a reflection of yourself, but if you look carefully with warm-hearted feeling, that is you.

  You may think you are very warm-hearted, but when you try to understand how warm, you cannot actually measure. Yet when you see yourself with a warm feeling in the mirror or the water, that is actually you. And whatever you do, you are there.

  When you do something with a warm-hearted feeling, Man-jushri, the Bodhisattva of wisdom, is there, and there is the true
  
BE	KIND	WITH	YOURSEI.F	79

you. You don't have to wonder where Manjushri is or what he is doing. When you do things with your warm-hearted mind, that is actual practice. That is how to take care of things, that is how to communicate with people.

   Some of you are priests and some are not priests, and each of you wiu go your own way. Those of you who are not married and those of you who are married each have your own way of extending practice to your everyday lives. Although our situa-tions are different, practice is the same, and we all meet Man-jushri. Even though he is one, he is everywhere, with everyone and everything. Whatever you do, whatever your practice is, Manjushri is there. The secret is not to forget the true mercy of Buddha who takes care of everything. If we lose this point, whatever we do doesn't make sense.

  So we put emphasis on warm heart, warm zazen. The warm feeling we have in our practice is, in other words, enlightenment, or Buddha's mercy, Buddha's mind. It is not a matter of just counting your breath or following your breath. If counting the breath is tedious, it may be better just to foUow the breath. But the point is, while inhaling and exhaling, to take care of the breath, just as a mother watches her baby. If a baby smiles, its mother wiu smile. If a baby cries, its mother is worried. That kind of close relationship, being one with your practice, is the point. I am not talking about anything new - the same old things!

  Our monastic rules are based on kind, warm-hearted mind. The idea is not to restrict your freedom, but rather to give you freedom to behave and act in your own way. It is not so impor-tant to foUow the rules literally. ActuaUy, if you break a rule now and then, we will know what is wrong with you, and your teacher, without criticizing you, may be able to help you more
  
80	NOT	AI-WAYS	SO

accurately. This is how to improve your practice in order to have good control over your desires and your everyday life. Then you will have big freedom from everything. That is the goal of our practice both for priests and for laypeople.

Please take care of your practice.	He very kind with yourself.

Thank you very much.

Respect for Things
In our zazen practice we stop our thinking, and we are free from our emotional activity. We don't say there is no emotional activ-ity, but we are free from it. We don't say we have no thinking, but our life activity is not limited by our thinking mind. In short, we can say that we trust ourselves completely, without thinking, without feeling, without discriminating berween good and bad, right and wrong. Because we respect ourselves, because we put faith in our life, we sit. That is our practice.

  When our life is based on respect and complete trust, it wiU be completely peaceful. Our relationship with nature should also be like this. We should respect everything, and we can practice respecting things in the way we relate with them.

  This morning when we were bowing in the zen do, we heard a big noise overhead because upstairs in the dining room people were pushing chairs across the tile floor without picking them up. This is not the way to treat chairs, not only because it may disturb the people who are bowing in the zendo underneath, but also because fundamentally this is not a respectful way to treat things.

  To push the chairs across the floor is very convenient, but it wiu give us a lazy feeling. Of course this kind of laziness is pa·
  
Hz	NOT	AI.WAYS	SO

of our culture, and it eventually causes us to fight with each other. Instead of respecting things, we want to use them for ourselves, and if it is difficult to use them, we want to conquer them. This kind of idea does not accord with the spirit of practice.

  In the same way my teacher Kishizawa Ian did not allow us to put away the amado more than one at a time. Do you know the amado? They are the wooden doors outside of shoji screens, which are put up to protect the shoji from storms. At the end of the building there is a big box for storing the amado. Since they are sliding doors, one priest can easily push five or six doors, and another priest can wait and put them in the box. But my teacher didn't like this. He told us to move them one by one. So we would slide each door and put it in the box, one door at a time.

  When we pick up the chairs one by one carefully, without making much noise, then we will have the feeling of practice in the dining room. We will not make much noise of course, but also the feeling is quite different. When we practice this way we ourselves are Buddha, and we respect ourselves. To care for the chairs means our practice goes beyond the zendo.

  If we think it is easy to practice because we have a beautiful building, that is a mistake. Actually it may be quite difficult to practice with a strong spirit in this kind of setting- where we have a handsome Buddha and offer beautiful Howers to decorate our Buddha hall. We Zen Buddhists have a saying that with a blade of grass we create a golden Buddha which is sixteen feet high. That is our spirit, so we need to practice respect for things.

  I don't mean that we should accumulate many leaves or grasses to make a big statue, but until we can see a big Buddha in a small leaf, we need to make much more effort. How much effort I don't know. Some people may find it quite easy, but for someone like me great effort is needed. Although seeing a large golden Buddha in a large golden Buddha is easier, when you see a large
  
RESPECT	rOR	"filiNGS	H)

Buddha in a blade of grass, your joy will be something special. So we need to practice respect with great effort.

  In this zendo everyone can come and practice our way, experi-enced students and also those who don't know anything about Zen. Both wiu have difficulties. New students wiu have difficul-ties that they could never have imagined. Old students have a double duty to do their own practice and to encourage those who have just come. Without telling them, "you should do this" or "you shouldn't do that," the old students should lead the new stu-dents so that they can practice our way more easily.

  Even though newer students don't know what Buddhism is, they will naturally have a good feeling when they come to a beautiful Buddha hall. That is the ornament of a Buddha land, but for Zen Buddhists especially, the true ornament of the Bud-dha hall is the people who arc practicing there. Each one of us should be a beautiful flower and each one of us should be Bud-dha,leading people in our practice. Whatever we do, we are con-sidering how to do this. Since there are no special rules for how to treat things or how to be friendly with others, we keep study-ing what wiu help people practice together. If you don't forget this point you will find out how to treat people, how to treat things, and how to treat yourself.

  This is what we call the Bodhisattva way. Our practice is to help people, and to help people we find out how to practice our way on each moment. To stop our thinking and to be free from emotional activity when we sit is not just a matter of concentra-tion. This is to rely completely on ourselves, to find absolute refuge in our practice. We are just like a baby who is in the lap of its mother.

  I think we have a very good spirit here in this zendo. I am rather amazed at the spirit, but the next question is how to extend this spirit to your everyday life. You do it by respecting things
  
84	NOT	ALWAYS	SO

and respecting each other, because when we respect things we will find their true life. When we respect plants we will find their real life, the power and beauty of Rowers.

  Though love is important, if it is separated from respect and sincerity, it will not work. With big mind and with pure sincer-ity and respect, love can really be love. So let's try hard and find out how to make a blade of grass into a big Buddha.

Thank you very much.

Observing the Precepts
In the full lotus position we cross the right leg over the left and the left leg over the right. SymbolicaUy, the right is activity and the left is the opposite, calmness of mind. If the left is wisdom, the right is practice; and when we cross our legs, we don't know which is which. So even though we have two, symbolicaUy we have oneness. Our posture is vertical without leaning right or left, backward or forward. This is an expression of perfect under-standing of the teaching that is beyond duality.

  When we extend this, we naturally have precepts and the study of how to observe our precepts. This posture of zazen is not just a kind of training, but is the actual way of transmitting Buddha's teaching to us. Word.~ by themselves are not good enough to actualize his teaching, so it is transmitted through activity or through human relationship.

  In addition to precepts we have the relationship between teacher and disciple. The disciple must choose the teacher, and then the teacher will accept the disciple, although sometimes a teacher may recommend another teacher. Between teachers there should not be any conAict, so if a teacher thinks another is more qualified, he may recommend him or her.
  
86 NOT  ALWAYS  SO

  Once you become a disciple, devote youtSeif to studying the Way. At fitSt as a disciple you may wish to pr.1ctice with a teacher not because you want to study Buddhism but for some other reason. Still it doesn't maUer, you know. If you devote youtSelf completely to your teacher, you will undetStand. You wiU be your teacher's disciple, and you can tr.1nsnut our way. This rela-tionship between teacher and disciple is very important, and at the same time it is difficult for both teacher and disciple to be teacher and disciple in its true sense, so they should both make their best effort.

  Teacher and disciple pr.1ctice various rituals together. Rituals are more than just tr.1ining. Through rituals we communicate and tr.1nsnut the teaching in a true sense. We put emphasis on selflessness. When we pr.1ctice together, we (orget our own pr.1C-tice. It is each individual's pr.1ctice, yet it is also othetS' pr.1ctice. For instance, when we pr.1ctice chanting, we 5.1Y, "Recite the sutr.1 with your eatS." Then with our eatS we listen to othetS, while with our mouths we pr.1ctice our own practice. Here we have complete egolessness in its true sense.

  Egolessness does not mean to give up your own individual practice. True egolessness has forgotten egoles.~nes.~. As long as you believe, "My pr.1ctice is egoless;' that means you stick to ego, because you stick to giving up ego-centered practice. When you practice your own pr.1ctice together with othctS, then true ego-lessness happens. That egolessness is not just egolessness. It also includes ego practice, but at the same time it is the practice of egolessness that is beyond ego or egolessness. Do you under-stand?

  This is also true in the observation of precepts. If you try to observe the precepts, that is not true observation of precepts. When you observe the precepl~ without trying to observe the precepts, that is true observation of the precepts. Our inmost
  
08HRVINC:	TilE	PRECEPTS	87

nature can help us. When we understand the precepts as an expression of our inmost nature, that is the Way as ;/ is. Then there are no precepts. When we are expressing our inmost nature, no precepts are necessary, so we are not observing any pre-cepts. On the other hand we have the opposite nature, so we want to observe our precept~. We feel that the necessity of observing the precepts will help us, and when we understand the precepts in this negative or prohibitory sense that is also the blos-soming of our true nature. So we have a choice of how to observe precepts, one negative and the other positive. Also, when we do not feel that we can observe all the precepts, then we can choose the ones that we feel we can work with.

  Precepts are not rules set up by someone. Since our life is the expression of our true nature, if something is wrong with that expression, then Buddha wiU say that is not the way. Then you will have precepts. The actual event or fact is first, not the rules. So it is the nature of precepts that we have a chance to choose our precepts. If you go one way, you will have these precepts; and if you take another way, you will have some other precepts. Whether you go this way or that way is up to you. Either way you will have some precepts. At first you should depend on your teacher. This is the best way, and you begin by following the pro-hibitory precepts. When you become familiar with our way, you will have a more positive observation of the precepts.

  How a teacher points out the student's mistake is very impor-tant. If a teacher thinks that what his student did is a mistake, he is not a true teacher. It may be a mistake, but on the other hand it is an expression of the student's true nature. When we under-stand this, we have respect for our student's true nature, and we will be careful how we point out mistakes.

  In the scriptures five point~ are made about how to be careful. One is that the teacher has to choose his opportunity and nC"
  
88 NOT  ALWAYS  SO

point out t.le student's mistake in hont of many people. If pos-sible the teacher points out the mistake personally in an appropri-ate time and place. Secondly the teacher is reminded to be truth-ful, which means the teacher does not point oU( his disciple's mistake just because he thinks it is a mistake. Wl.;n the teacher understands why the disciple did so, then he can I; truthful.

  The third reminder is for the teacher to be g«Iltlc and cahn, and speak in a low voice rather than shouting. This is somcthing very delicate like truthfulness, but here the scripture pUIS cmpha-sis on having a calm gende attitude when talking about somcone's mistake.

  The fourth one is that the teacher gives advice or points out the disciple'S mistake solely for the sake of helping him, and docs not do this just to get something off his chest. Hcrc the tcacher is very careful, noticing when the student is making some excuse for what he did, or when the student is not serious enough. Then the teacher should ignore him until he becomcs more seri-ous. Even thoW1;h we give advice only for the sake of helping the student, still this does. not mean to always be easy with the stu-dent. Sometimes we should be very tough with the student, or we cannot help in a true sense.

  The last one is to point out the student's mistake with compas-sion, which means that the teacher is not just the tcacher but also the disciple's friend. & a friend the teacher points OUI some problem or gives some advice.

  So it is not easy to be a teacher or to be a student, and we can-not n:Iy on anything, even the precepts. We have to make our utmost dfort to help each other. And we do not observc our precepts just for the sake of precepts or practice rituals for the perfection of rituals. We are studying how to express our true nature.
"i'hank you very much.

Pure Silk, Sharp Iron

Last week one of the Sunday School children saw me sitting zazen, and she said, "I can do it." She crossed her legs and said, "Now what? Now what?" I was very interested in her question because many of you have the same question. You come here every day to practice Zen, and you ask me, "Now what? Now what?"

  I don't think I can fully explain this point. It is not a question that can be answered. You should know for yourself. We sit in a formal posture so we can experience something through our bodies, not by my teaching, but by your own physical practice. However, to be able to sit in a particular way and to attain a par-ticular state of mind is not perfect study. After you have full experience of mind and body, you will be able to express it in other ways as well.

  Without sticking to a formal posture, you naturally convey your mind to others in various ways. You will have the same state of mind sitting in a chair or standing, working or speaking. It is the state of mind in which you do not stick to anything. This is the purpose of our practice.
  
90 NOT   AJ.WAYS   so

   Yesterday a Japanese visitor was speaking about Japanese litera-ture. Japanese people have been studying Chinese characters and Chinese culture since about 600 or 700 A.D., and after using Chi-nese characters they established their own way of writing. The same thing wiu happen here with our practice. One hundred years after the Japanese government stopped sending students to China to study Chinese culture, we had an exquisite Japanese cul-ture. In the Fujiwara period especiaUy, we had beautiful Japanese literature and calligraphy. There was a lot of freedom. Artists and scholars studied the arts, philosophy, and religion. They tried various disciplines, and they had good teachers.

  The work that followed the Fujiwara period was not so good. According to my visitor some of the later caUigraphy was too formal and shows too much of the artist's ego. We cannot see any personality in their calligraphy. The personality we sec in art should be well trained without much ego in it. I think you can understand the difference between personality' and ego. Ego is something that covers your good personality. Everyone has char-acter, but if you don't train yourself, your character is covered by ego. You cannot appreciate your personality.

  Through long practice and training, we get rid of ego. A word in Japanese that expresses this training is /lCnI. Nenl is how we refine silk by washing it many times so that the thread~ are white and soft enough to weave. We also use the character for iron. We temper iron by hitting it while it is hot-not to forge or to shape it but to make it strong. Hitting it after it is cold doesn't work. Training is something like this. When you are young, you have a lot of ego, a lot of desires. Through training you rub and wash your ego, and you become quite soft, like pure white silk. Even though you have strong desires, if you temper them enough, you will have strong sharp iron, like a Japanese sword. This is how we train ourselves.
  
PURl;	SILK,	SHARP	IRON	91

  This is not something for me to talk about, but something I must show you by my everyday life, which is not so good. I am afraid you wiU study only my weak points. We should know why we practice zazen, and we should be able to teU the difference between something that is good and something that just looks good. There is a big difference.

  Unless you train yourself through hard practice, you will have no eyes to see and no feeling to appreciate something that is truly good. Only when many people have the eyes to see or to feel something good wiU we have good teachers and students. This is mutual practice. Buddha was great because people were great. When people are not ready, there will be no Buddha. I don't expect everyone of you to be a great teacher, but we must have eyes to see what is good and what is not so good. This mind will be acquired by practice.

  Even in the Fujiwara period, Chinese culture and caUigraphy were far superior to Japanese. The Chinese people had various brushes and al\vays used the brush more than the Japanese people did. The Japanese had fewer materials to make brushes. We had lots of bamboo but few sheep or animals from which to make brushes. So our training in caUigraphy was more limited than that of Chinese peoples. But even before Japanese people mas-tered Chinese caUigraphy completely, they had already started a unique Japanese caUigraphy. I find this very interesting.

  HistoricaUy Buddhists have been very sincere about this point. That is why we have Dharma transmission. Chinese masters especiaUy put strong emphasis on transmission. It is necessary to master the teacher's way completely, before you are free from it. That is very hard practice. That is why it takes such a long time to be a Zen master. It is not knowledge; it is not some power. The point is whether a person is trained enough to be like pure white silk and very sharp iron. At that time, without trying to do
  
92	NOT	A LWA,YS	SO

anything, you will be able to express your personaliry in its true sense. If we cannot see any true personaliry in a person's work, it means that he has not yet eliminated his habitual way.

  My own habit is absentmindedness. I am naturally very for-getful. Even though I started working on it when I went to my teacher at the age of thirteen, I have not been able to do anything about it. II is not because of old age that I am forgetful; it is my tendency. BU! working on it, I found that I could get rid of my selfish way of doing things. If the purpose of practice and train-ing was just to correct your weak points, I think it would be almost impossible to succeed. Even so, it is necessary to work on them, because as you work on them, your character will be trained, and you will become free of ego.

  People say I am very patient, but actually I have a very impa-tient character. My inborn character is very impatielll. I don't try to correct it any longer, but I don't think my eITort was in vain, because I studied many things. I had to be very patient in order to work on my habit, and I must be very patient when people criticize me about my forgetfulness. "Oh, he is so forget-ful, we cannot rely on him at all. What should we do with him?"

   My teacher scolded me every day: "This forgetful boy!" But I just wanted 10 stay with him. I didn't want to leave him. I was very patient with whatever he said. So I think that is why I am very patient with others' criticism about me. Whatever they say, I don't mind so much. I am not so angry with them. If you know how important it is to train yourself in this way, I think you will understand what Buddhism is. This is the most important point in our practice.
Thank you very much.

Not Always So
In Buddhist scripture there is a famous pas.Qge that explains that water is not just water. For human beings water is water, but for celestial beings it is a jewel. For fish it is their home, and for people in heU or hungry ghosts it is blood, or maybe fire. If they want to drink it, water changes into fire, and they cannot drink it. The same water looks very different to various beings.

  Most people think that "water is water" is the right under-standing, and that it should not be a home or a jewel, blood or fire. Water should be water. But Dogen Zenji says: "Even though you say 'water is water,' it is not quite right."

  When we practice zazen, we may think, "This is the right prac-tice, and we will attain something correct and perfect." But if you ask Dogen Zenji, he may say, "Not quite right." This point is a good koan for you to study.

  When we say, "Water is water," we understand things materi-aUy. We say that water is HlO, but under some conditions HlO may be ice or mist, or it may be vapor or a human body. It is only water under some circumstances. For convenience, we may tentatively say that water is water, but we should appreciate water in its true sense. Water is more than just water.

  When I am drinking water, water is everything. The whole world is water. Nothing exists besides water. When we drink water with this understanding and attitude, that is water, and at the same time it is more than water.

  When we "just sit" in meditation, we include everything. There is nothing else, nothing but you. That is shikant3za. We become completely ourselves. We have everything, and we are fully satisfied. There is nothing to attain, so we have a sense of gratitude or joyful mind.

  I think I understand why you practice zazen. Most of you are seeking something. You seek what is true and real, because you have heard so many things that you cannot believe in. You are not even seeking for what is beautiful, because you have found that something which looks beautiful may not actually be beauti-ful. It is just the surface of something or just an ornament. You are also aware of how people can be hypocritical. Many people who appear to be virtuous don't convey real gratitude or joyful mind, so you don't trust them.

  You don't know whom to trust or what teaching to believe, so you come here looking for something. I cannot give you what you are seeking, because I myself don't believe in any particular thing. I don't say that water is water, or that water is a jewel or a house, fire or blood. As Dogen Zenji said, water is more than that. We may want to stick to righteousness, beauty, truth, or virtue, but it is not wise to seek for something like that. There is something more.

  I have noticed that you like to travel. Today Alaska, the next day India and Tibet. You are seeking for something, whether it is a fire or a jewel, or something else. When you realize it is not always so, you cannot believe in those things anymore, and your
  
NOT	ALWAYS	SO	97

way of seeking the truth wiU change. Otherwise you wiu be sticking to something.

  To seek for a great teaching like Buddhism is to seek for some-thing good. Whatever you find, you will be like a sightseer. Even though you don't travel in your car, spiritually you are sight-seeing: "Oh, what a beautiful teaching. This is a really true teach-ing!" To be a sightseer is one of the dangers of Zen practice. Be careful! To be captivated by the teaching doesn't help at aU. Don't be fooled by things, whether it is something beautiful or something that looks true. This is just playing games. You should trust Buddha, trust the Dharma, and trust the Sangha in its true sense.

  Real freedom is to not feel limited when wearing this Zen robe, this troublesome formal robe. Similarly in our busy life we should wear this civilization without being bothered by it, with-out ignoring it, without being caught by it. Without going any-where, without escaping it, we can find composure in this busy life.

  Dogen Zenji says to be like a boatman. Although he is carried by the boat, he is also handling the boat. That is how we live in this world. Even though you understand how to live in this world like a boatman, that does not mean you are able to do it. It is very difficult, which is why you practice zazen.

  Yesterday I said, "However painful your legs are, you shouldn't move," and some people may have understood what I said liter-ally. What I was reaUy saying is that your determination to prac-tice zazen should be like that. If it is too painful, you can change your posture, but your determination should be like that. And "should be" is also a good example. It is not necessarily so.

  The secret of Soto Zen is just two words: "Not always so." Oops-three words in English. In Japanese, two words. "Not always so." This is the secret of the teaching. It may be so, but it
  
98 NOT   ALWAYS   SO

is not always so. Without being caught by words or rules, with-OUI tOO many preconceived ideas, we actually do something, and doing something, we apply our teaching.

  To stick to something rigidly is laziness. Before you do some-thing difficult, you want to undersland it, so you are caught by words. When you are brave enough to accept your surroundings without saying what is right and what is wrong, then the teaching that was told to you will help. If you are caught by the teaching, you will have a double problem - whether you should follow the teaching or go your own way. This problem is created by grasp-ing the teaching. So practice first, and then apply the teaching.

  We practice zazen like someone close to dying. There is noth-ing to rely on, nothing to depend on. Because you are dying, you don't wan! anything, so you cannot be fooled by anything.

  Most people are not only fooled by something, they are also fooled by themselves, by their ability, their beauty, their confi-dence, or their outlook. We should know whether or not we are fooling ourselves. When you are fooled by something else, the damage will not be so big, but when you are fooled by yourself, it is fatal.

  You may feel some resistance to this Zen way of life or to your life in the world, but don't be lost in resistance. Do you under-stand? If you are deeply involved in resistance or fight, you will lose yourself. You will lose your strength, lose your friends and your parents. You will lose everything, your confidence, the brightness of your eyes. You are a dead body! And no one will say: "Oh, I am sorry." No one will say so. Look at your face in the mirror to see if you are still alive or not. Even though you practice zazen, if you don't stop being fooled, it won't help at aU. Do you understand?

Let's practice hard, while we are still a little bit alive.

Thank you very much.

Direct Experience of Reality

Zen Master Dogen said: "Mountains and rivers, earth and sky-everything is encouraging us to attain enlightenment." In the same way the purpose of my lecture is to encourage you to attain enlightenment. to have a real experience of Buddhism. Even though you think you are studying Buddhism when you are read-ing. you may have JUSt an inteUectual understanding rather than a direct experience.

  Intellectual understanding is necessary. but it will not complete your study. This does not mean to ignore intellectual under-standing. or that enlightenment is entirely different from intellec-tual understanding. The true. direct experience of things can be intellectualized. and this conceptual explanation may help you have direct experience. Both intellectual understanding and direct experience are necessary. but it is important to know the difference. Sometimes you may think something is an enlighten-ment experience. and it isjust intellectual. That is why you must have a true teacher who knows the difference.
  
100	NOT	ALWAYS	SO

  So when we study Buddhism, it is necessary to have strong conviction, and to study not only with our mind but also with our body. If you come to the lecture even though you are sleepy and unable to listen to it, your attending the lecture will bring you some experience of enlightenment. It wiU be enlightenment itself.

  Direct experience will come when you are completely one with your activiry; when you have no idea of self. This could be when you are sitting, but it could also be whenever your way-seeking mind is strong enough to forget your selfish desires. When you believe you have some problem it means your practice is not good enough. When your practice is good enough, what-ever you see, whatever you do, that is the direct experience of realiry. This point should be remembered. Usually, without knowing this point we are involved in judgments, so we say, "this is right, that is wrong," "this is perfect," and "that is not perfect." That seems ridiculous when we are doing real practice.

  Sometimes we may say that for Duddhists there is nothing wrong. Whatever you do, you know, "Buddha is doing it, not me," or, "Buddha is responsible, not me." Dut if you use that as an excuse, that is a misunderstanding. We say, "All beings have Bud-dha Nature" to encourage you to have an actual experience of it. The purpose of the statement isjust to encourage your true prac-tice, not to give you some excuse for your lazy practice or your practice that is merely formal.

  In China people would carry something on their heads, per-haps honey or water in big jars. Sometimes someone must have dropped the jar. This is a big mistake, of course, but if you do not look back, it is aU right. You just go on and on, even though there is no more honey or water on your head. If you go on and on, that is not a mistake. But if you say, "Oh! I lost it! Oh my!" that is a mistake. That is not true practice.
  
DIRECT	ExrERlroNc~ o~ RroALlTY	101

  When a skillful martial artist uses his sword, he should be able to cut a fly ofT his friend's nose without cutting his nose. To have the fear of cutting his nose is not true practice. When you do something, have a strong determination to do it! WlIOOS/I! [Sound of sword cutting air.) Withom any idea of skillful or not, dangerous or not, you just do it. When you do something with this kind of conviction, that is true practice. That is true enlight-enment.

  This strong conviction to realize your life is beyond "success-ful" or "not successful." Beyond any feeling of fear, you just do it. That is real practice and that is the way-seeking mind, which goes beyond the dualistic idea of good and bad, right or wrong. You just do it.

  That is how we practice the Four Vows. We help people just because we wish to, not because we think we wiU be successful. Sentient beings are numberless, so we don't know if we can com-pletely help aU sentient beings. Yet it doesn't matter. As long as we are here, we should continue our practice of helping beings.

  There is no limit to our understanding of the teaching. Whether we understand it or not, we go on trying to understand. When we study with this kind of conviction, we wiU meet with valuable teachings, rarely encountered even in a thousand kalpas. This absolute teaching is incomparable to any other teaching.

  An incomparable teaching does not mean it is the best teach-ing. As Dogen Zenji says, "We do not discuss the meaning of the teaching in a comparative way but emphasize how to practice." We focus our study on how to accept the teaching and live the teaching. Whether or not our teaching is profound or lofty misses the point, which is to develop our attitude of study. This is characteristic of Zen and characteristic of true Buddhism. Rather than setting up a system of Buddhism, we put emphasis on true practice.
  
102	NOT	AI.WAYS	SO

  All the rules we have are just to make practice easier. Not to make our door narrow but to open our door to everyone. We know how difficult it is, so we set up some rules to help you prac-tice. If there is no pole for you to climb up, it is difficult for you to experience the kind of feeling you will have when you jump off the top. If a baby has no toy, it is rather difficult to have the actual experience of a human being. The rules we have are a kind of toy to help your experience as a Buddhist. It does not mean that the toy is always necessary, but when you are young it is necessary.

  So it is not necessary to always stick to the rules. What is important is to extend your way of life deeper and wider. To have a beautiful ceramic bowl is not necessary when you are ready to appreciate things. Whatever it is, things will encourage your practice. If you can enjoy your life in its true sense, then even if you injure your body, it is aU right. Even if you die, it is aU right. When you are encouraged by everything, and you realize every-thing is always helping you, then there is no difference whether you are dead or alive. It is aU right. Quite all right. That is com-plete renunciation.

  Your practice will be vigorous enough to continue forever, regardless of life or death. In this way, our enlightenment can be explained. How to practice in [his way is up to you. I cannot explain your understanding of Buddhism. You should explain your way of life as a Buddhist in your own way.

  My talk is just to encourage your practice. You cannot foUow it exactly, bur maybe it wiu give you some suggestion.

Thank you very much.

True Concentration
True concentration does not mean to be concentrated on only one thing. Although we say, "do things one by one," what it means is difficult to explain. Without trying to concentrate our mind on anything, we are ready to concentrate on something. For instance. if my eyes are on one person in the zendo. it will be impossible to give my anention to others. So when I practice zazen, I'm not watching anybody. Then, if anyone moves, I can spot them.

  Avalokiteshvara is the Bodhisanva of compassion. Sometimes portrayed as a man, Avalokiteshvara also appears in the form of a woman. Sometimes she has one thousand hands to help others, but if she concentrates on only one hand. then 999 hands will be of no use.

  From ancient times the main point of practice has been to have a clear. calm mind-whatever you do. Even when you eat some-thing good, your mind should be calm enough to appreciate the labor of preparing the food and the effort of making the dishes, chopsticks, bowls, and everything we use. With a serene mind we
  
104	NOT	AI.wAYS	SO

can appreciate the flavor of each vegetable, one by one. We don't add much seasoning, so we can enjoy the virtue of each vegetable. That is how we cook and how we eat food.

  To know someone is to sense that person's Ravor-what you feel from that person. Each one has his or her own flavor, a par-ticular personality from which many feelings appear. To fully appreciate this personality or flavor is to have a good relationship. Then we can really be friendly. To be friendly does not mean to cling to someone or try to please them bill to fully appreciate them.

  To appreciate things and people, our mind~ need to be calm and clear. So we practice zazen or "just sitting" without any gaining idea. At this time you are you yourself. You "setde your-self on yourself." Wilh this practice we have freedom, but it may be that the freedom you mean and the freedom Zen Buddhists mean are not the same. To altain freedom, we cross our legs, keep our posture upright, and let our eyes and ears be open to every-thing. This readiness or openness is important because we are liable to go to extremes and stick to something. In this way we may lose our calmness or mirrorlike mind.

  Zazen practice is how we obtain calmness and clarity of mind, bill we cannot do this by physically forcing something on our-selves or by creating some special state of mind. You may think that to have a mirrorlike mind is Zen practice. It is so, bill if you practice zazen in order to altain that kind of mirrorlike mind,that is not the practice we mean. It has instead become the art of Zen.

  The difference between the art of Zen and true Zen is that already you have true Zen without trying. When you try to do something, you lose it. You are concentrating on one hand out of one thousand hands. You lose 999 hands. That is why we say, ''Just sit." It does not mean to stop your mind altogether or to be
  
TRUE	CONCENTRATION	lOS

concentrated completely on your breathing, although these are a help. You may become bored when you practice counting the breath because it does not mean much to you, but then you have lost your understanding of real practice. We practice concentra-tion or let our mind follow our breathing so that we are not involved in some complicated practice in which we lose our-selves, attempting to accomplish something.

  In the art of Zen you try to be like a skiUful Zen master who has great strength and good practice: "Oh, I want to be like him. I must try hard." The art of Zen is concerned with how to draw a straight line or how to control your mind. But Zen is for every-one, even if you cannot draw a straight line. If you can draw a line,just draw a line, that is Zen. For a child this is natural, and even though the line is not straight, it is beautiful. So whether or not you like the cross-legged position, or whether or not you think you can do it, if you know what zazen really is, you can do it.

  The most important thing in our practice is just to follow our schedule and to do things with people. You may say this is group practice, but it is not so. Group practice is quite different, another kind of art. During the war some young people, encouraged by the militaristic mood of Japan, recited to me this line from the Slms/log;: "To understand birth and death is the main point of practice." They said, "Even though I don't know anything about that sutra, I can die easily at the front." That is group practice. Encouraged by trumpets, guns, and war cries, it is quite easy to die.

  That kind of practice is not our practice either. Although we practice with people, our goal is to practice with mountains and rivers, with trees and stones, with everything in the world, every-thing in the universe, and to find ourselves in this big cosmos. When we practice in this big world we know intuitively which
  
106	NOT	ALWAYS	so

way to go. When your surroundings give you a sib'" showing which way to go, even though you have no idea of following a sign, you will go in the right direction.

  To practice our way is good, but you may be practicing with a mistaken idea. Still if you know, "I am making a mistake, but even so I cannot help continuing with my practice," then there is no need to worry. If you open your lfue eyes, and accept the you that is involved in a wrong idea of practice, that is real practice.

  You accept your thinking because it is already there. You can-not do anything about it. There is no need to try to get rid of it. This is not a mailer of right or wrong, but of how to accept frankly, with openness of mind, what you are doing. That is the most important point. When you practice zazen you will accept the you who is thinking about something, without trying to be free of the images you have. "Oh! Here they come." If some-one is moving over there, "Oh, he is moving." And if he stops moving, your eyes remain the same. That is how your eyes will see when you are not watching anything special. In that way your practice includes everything, one thing after another, and you do not lose your calmness of mind.

  The extent of this practice is limitless. With this as our base, we have real freedom. When you evaluate yourself as being good or bad, right or wrong, that is comparative value, and you lose your absolute value. When you evaluate yourself by a limitless measure, each one of you will be settled on your real self. That is enough, even though you think you need a beller measurement. If you understand this point, you will know what real practice is for human beings and for everything.

Thank you very much.

Wherever I Go, I Meet Myself

Most of us want to know what the self is. This is a big problem. I am trying to understand why you have this problem. It seems to me that even though you try to understand who you are, it is an endles.~ task, and you will never see your self. You say that to sit without thinking is difficult, but it will be even more difficult to try to think about your self. To reach a conclusion is almost impossible, and if you continue trying, you become crazy, and you won't know what to do with your self.

  Your culture is based on ideas of self-improvement. The idea of improvement is rather scientific. In the scientific sense, improvement means that instead of going to Japan by ship, now you can go by jumbo jet. So improvement is based on compara-tive value, which is also the basis of our society and our economy. I understand that you are rejecting that idea of civilization, but you are not rejecting the idea of improvement. You still try to improve something. Perhaps most of you sit to improve your zazen, but Buddhists do not hold so strongly to the idea of improvement.
  
loR	NOT	AI.WAYS	SO

  When you practice zazen trying to improve yourself, you may want to know yourself in a more psychological way. Psychology will teU you about certain aspects of yourself, but it will not tell you exactly who you are. It is just one of many interpretations of your mind. If you go to a psychologist or psychiatrist, you will endlessly have new information about yourself. As long as you are going, you may feel some relief. You may feel released from the burden you carry, but in Zen we understand ourselves quite differently.

  Tozan, the founder of the Chinese Soto Zen School, said, "Don't try to see yourself objectively." In other words, don't try to seek for information about yourself that is the objective truth. That is information. He says that the real you is quite different from any information you have. The real you is not that kind of thing. "I go my own way. Wherever I go, I meet myself."

  Tozan rejects your effort to cling to information about your-self, and says to go on alone using your own legs. Whatever people may say, you should go your own way, and at the same time you should practice with people. This is another point. It means that to meet yourself is to practice with people.

  When you see someone practicing sincerely, you see yourself. If you are impressed by someone's practice, you may say, "Oh, she is doing very weU." That "she" is neither she nor you-she is something more than that. What is she? After thinking for a while, you may say, "Oh, she is there and I am here." But when you were struck by her practice, that "her" is neither you nor her. When you are struck by something, that is actually the real you. Tentatively I say "you," but that you is the pure experience of our practice. As long as you are trying to improve yourself, you have a core idea of self, which is wrong practice. That is not the prac-tice we mean.

When  you empry your mind, when you  give up everything

WHroREVF.R	I	GO,	I	MroE·r	MYSELF	10<)

and just practice zazen with an open mind, then whatever you see you meet yourself. That is you, beyond she or he or me. As long as you are clinging to the idea of self and trying to improve your practice or discover something, trying to create an improved, better self, then your practice has gone astray. You have no time to reach the goal, so eventuaUy you wiU get tired out, and you wiu say, "Zen is no good. 1 practiced zazen for ten years, but I didn't gain anything!" But if you just come here and sit with sincere students and find yourself among them. and you continue in that way. that is our practice. You can have this kind of experience wherever you are. As Tozan said. "Wherever I go, I meet myself." If he sees water, that is to see hin1.~clf. To see water is enough for him. even though he cannot see himself in the water.

  So the way to understand yourself is not by understanding yourself objectively or gathering information from various sources. If people say you are crazy-"Okay. I am crazy!" If people say you are a bad student. it may be so. "I am a bad stu-dent. but I am trying pretty hard." That is enough. When you sit in that way. you accept yourself and accept everything together with yourself. When you are involved in various silly problems. you sit with the problems you have. That is you at that time. When you try to get out of your problems. that is already wrong practice.

  If you cling to an idea you create. like a self or an objective reality. you wiu be lost in the objective world that you create with your mind. You are creating things one after another, so there is no end. There may be various worlds you are creating. and to create and see many things is very interesting. but you should not be lost in your creations.

  The other side of our practice is that we think and we act. We do not try to be like a stone. Everyday life is our practice. Instead of being enslaved by the thinking mind or the imagina-
  
110	NOT	ALWAYS	SO

tion or emotional activity, we just think in its true sense. Think-ing comes to us from our true self, which includes everything. Before we think about it, trees, birds, and everything are thinking. And when they think, they groan or they sing. That is their thinking. There is no need for us to think more than that. If we see t/r;IIgs as ;/ ;s, thinking is already there. This kind of pure thinking is the thinking we have in our practice, so we always have freedom from ourselves too. We can see tll;II~S as ;/ ;s, and at the same time we can think about things. Because we do not cling to any particular standard for thinking, for us there is no true way and no false way.
Thank you very much.

The Boss of Everything

The reason we practice zazen is to be the bos..~ of everything. Wherever we are. But if I say so, it will create a misunderstand-ing: that you are the boss of everyone or everything. When you understand in that way, you exist as an idea in your mind. That is not the "you" we mean. That is a delusion because the ideas you have are not well supported by your practice, and you become enslaved by the idea of "you" and "others." When the real power of practice is supporting your understanding, then the you who is practicing our way is the boss of everything, the bos..~ of you yourself.

  That is why Buddha said to control yourself. The self you have to control is the deluded you, not the real you. You have an idea of who you are, and you are caught by it. You are enslaved by the deluded you, so you have difficulty or confusion. When these ideas are well controlled by the power of your practice, then that "you" is the boss or everything. Then even a confused mind will be supported by your practice.

Sounds come to your ears when you are practicing zazen.	You

112	NOT	ALWAYS	SO

may hear various voices, and sometimes you may have various ideas in your mind, but if your practice is good, your practice owns or includes the things you hear and the images you have. They are a part of you. Your practice is strong enough to have them, to own them without being enslaved by them, as you have your own hands and eyes.

  Sometimes it looks like the left hand and the right hand are not cooperating when you are holding something, but they are trying to do something. When you are really the boss of everything, even though it looks like confusion, it is not confusion. [t may look like you are doing something wrong, and people may say, "Oh, he is doing something wrong," but that is their understand-ing. You are not doing anything wrong because you own every-thing, and you are managing things as you manage your own hands.

  You are letting yourself be with everything and letting things be as they want to be. That is the power of practice, and that is quite different from doing something wrong. Someone doing something wrong may suffer, but for you there is no suffering. You are just managing things in some way, as your own.

  The precepts also should be observed in this way. You observe precepts not because you have to follow Buddha's words, but to extend true practice into your everyday life or to settle yourself on yourself. That self includes everything. Sometimes we say that to extend your practice into everyday life is to be completely involved in your activity, or to be one with things, but that is not so clear. Then you may say that being caught up with baseball mania or infatuated with gambling is the same as practice, but that is not practice, because you are enslaved by it. You are not the boss of gambling-gambling is the boss of you. Your practice is not working. You are enslaved by something which you create in your mind.
  
THE	IIOSS	Of	~VERYTIIING	113

  Your mind whirls on and creates some delusion. You have a gaining idea or a playful speculative idea, that's all. So you are enslaved by yourself and by gambling. You are not practicing zazen at all. You are not the boss, you do not own your mind, and you do not even own your legs, because as soon as you get up, your legs want to go to Reno! Your practice does not support your legs. That is the difference.

  So to be one with something does not mean to be caught by it. You are caught when you become a member of something in your mind. You create something interesting in your mind, you become very suggestible and feel the zeal to be a member of the group you have in your mind. You are enslaved by it, even though you have nothing besides what you created in your mind. There is no practice - nothing which is supporting you. You are not the boss, and you even lose yourself. That is the difference.

  So we say to practice zazen without any gaining idea, without any purpose. Let things work as they do, supporting everything as your own. Real practice has orientation or direction, but it has no purpose or gaining idea, so it can include everything that comes. Whether it is good or bad doesn't matter. If something bad comes: "Okay, you are a part of me;" and if something good comes: "Oh, okay." Because we do not have any special goal or purpose of practice, it doesn't matter what comes.

  Since it includes everything, we call it big mind. Whatever it is, it is included within us, and we own it, so we caU it big mind or "purposeles.~ purpose" or "tongueless tongue." Even though I talk about something, there is no purpose. I am talking to myself because you are a part of me, so I have no purpose in my talk. Something is going, that is all. It goes because of the real joy of sharing your practice with everything.

  When you practice zazen, everything practices zazen, every-thing you have is practicing zazen. Buddha practices zazen, Bod-
  
114	NOT	ALWAYS	SO

hidharma practices zazen, and everything practices zazen with you. And you share the practice with everything. Zazen hap-pens in that way, our real life happens in that way, our real Bod-hisattva way happens in that way.

  That is how you help others. To help others means to share your practice with people. We share our practice with children and with people on the street. Even though they do not practice zazen, we can share the practice, because if I see people, they are already here, and I practice zazen with them, with the sound of the car, with everything.

  If someone asks me why I practice, I may answer that it is to have a weU-oriented mind. The point is not to lose this well-oriented mind. In Japan children have a Bodhidharma toy. Do you know the toy? It is made of paper, and even though you push it down, it will stand back up. That is weU-oriented prac-tice. People enjoy tossing the toy around, because wherever it goes, it wiu stand back up. That is a good example of our practice.

  We cannot find where the self is. If you say, "Here is my mind," that is already an idea of self. It is here instead of there. You think your mind is in your head, but where is it? No one knows. So our practice is to be with everything. Without being enslaved by it, you are able to share your practice with everything. That is how to establish yourself on yourself. You are ready to include everything. When you include everything, that is the real self.
Thank you very much.

Sincere Practice

Although Dogen Zenji is considered to be the founder of the Soto Zen school in Japan, he didn't like to identify himself as "Zen," let alone "Sow." If necessary, he said to caU us Buddha's disciples, and he called himself Monk Dogen.

  When Dogen Zenji studied in China with the Zen master Tendo Nyojo Zenji, there were various schools of Zen like Rin-zai, Sow, Ummon, Hogen, and Igyo. According to Dogen though, Nyojo Zenji did not belong to any particular school. His Zen wasjust to practice zazen and to realize Buddha's spirit with his own body and mind. That was why Dogen accepted him as his teacher.

  In Japan Dogen had studied Tendai Buddhism and later went [0 Eisai Zenji's temple to study Rinzai. But Eisai died shortly after, and Dogen wanted to continue his practice with the right teacher, so he went to China with Myozen, who was one of Eisai's disciples. Although he visited many temples and saw many Zen teachers, he couldn't accept anyone as his teacher until he met Nyojo Zenji.
   
116	NOT	ALWAYS	SO

  When Dogen Zenji saw Nyojo ZelUi for the first time, even without studying under him, he accepted him as his teacher. And similarly Nyojo Zenji right away thought, "This is my disciple, who wiU carryon my practice." One evening during meditation, Nyojo Zenji was scolding someone who was sleeping, and at that time Dogen Zenji had an awakening. Submitting his realization to his teacher, Dogen Zenji received Dharma transmission from Nyojo Zenji. Later he returned to Japan.

  The first thing we notice here is that Dogen Zenji was a monk who wanted to be a sincere disciple of the Duddha. That's aU. He already had given up the scholarly study of Duddhism, so his problem was how to be a good disciple from the bottom of his heart and mind. To have this spirit is the most important point. Since he was such a sincere student, he could not accept teachers who were not as sincere as he was, and he could not accept some-one who was only a good speaker. He wanted to meet a monk who was really practicing Zen in its true sense. So when he saw Nyojo Zenji, he accepted him as a teacher, and when Nyojo Zenji saw him, he acknowledged Dogen's sincerity.

  What is sincere practice? When you are not so sincere it is dif-ficult to know, but when you are sincere you cannot accept what is superficial. Only when you become very sincere wiU you know what it is. It is like appreciating good art. If you want to appreciate good art the most important thing is to see good work. If you have seen a lot of good work, then when you see some-thing that is not so good you will immediately know that it is not so good. Your eyes have become sharp enough to see.

  That is why Dogen Zenji put emphasis on the teacher. If you want to know what is sincerity, you should have a good teacher, because by seeing him you wiU know what a good teacher is. When you see a sincere person you wiU know what sincerity is. It is not something that I can describe. You will feel it with your intuition. That kind of intuition will be gained by seeing a good teacher.

  To develop your well-polished eye, or clear, unbiased judg-ment, it is important to give up, or be ready to give up everything, including your understanding of the teaching and your knowl-edge of Buddhism. Then you will be able to tell what is good and what is bad. Many teachers gave up sutra study and only practiced zazen. They did not rely on anything, but just practiced zazen to purify their minds. Any teaching can be a good teach-ing for you, but because of your faulty judgment, the teaching does not make much sense. You spoil good teaching with your own judgment, but when you do not judge it, then you can accept the teaching as it is.

  The teaching that Dogen received from Nyojo was this great spirit, ready to give up everything. Especially when he practiced zazen, he had nothing in his mind. That purity of practice struck him. When you are trying to give up everything, you haven't given up everything yet. When you become tired of foolish dis-cussion or foolish study, of foolish mind grasping for something to rely on, then you will seek for something called truth or true teaching. You will be completely involved in pure practice, giv-ing up everything.

  My teacher, Kishizawa Roshi, was a great scholar, and his study started after he gave up everything. He didn't care for position, fame, or reputation. Whatever people said about him, he didn't mind. He continued his study and practice just to meet ancient teachers who had devoted themselves to the teaching. When you give up everything, there is no Soto or Rinzai. That was true with my teacher.

  Whenever he met a student or scholar, he would ask for any written teachings they might have. Whatever it was, he was very much interested in reading it. He was always seeking for his friend, seeking for his teacher. It did not matter to him whether or not the person was famous. Only when you give up every-thing can you see the true teacher.

  Even the name of Buddhism is already a dirty spot on our practice. What is important is not the teaching, but [he character or effort of [he student. Even to seek for enlightenment means your mind is not big enough. You are not sincere enough because you have some purpose in your study. And [he desire [0 accomplish something or even [0 propagate Buddhism is not pure enough. Just to see someone who is holy, great, and pure is [he purpose of our study of Zen or Buddhism.

  On [hat point your teacher should be strict. When you are lazy he wiII be very angry. If you are always involved in some-thing [hat is not pure enough, you are wasting your time. As much as possible, follow your inner voice, rejecting useless things. Dogen Zenji said that if your practice is pure enough you will be supported by Buddha, so do not worry about who wiII support you or what wiII happen [0 you. Moment after moment complete1y devote yourself and listen [0 your inner voice. Then you will see someone who is great in the true sense. You will see someone who can accept you, someone whom you can accept. That is the most important point for Zen students. If you cannot accept your teacher in [his way, seek for someone else. Without [his kind of spirit it is almost impossible to study our way.

  To realize way-seeking mind is to practice zazen, and how you practice zazen is to have the right posture. Tatsugami Roshi mentioned an interesting way to practice right posture by saying, "Yes." That was very good! How about my mudra? "Yes." How about my eyes? "Yes." In short, zazen is "Yes." My spine-"Yes." My chin -"Yes." You are not actually checking your posture. You are just accepting your posture -"Yes."

That is zazen.  There is no extra activity in your practice; that
NCERE	PRACTICE	119

is the spirit for you to have. There is no other secret in our prac-tice. If you have something more than that, it is heresy. When you have some extra fancy practice, you will not reach this point.

  II is the same thing with the precepts, such as "Don't kill." You may think that you cannot survive if you do not kill anything. But whether or not it is possible is out of the question. If the precept says, "Don't kill," then you say, "Yes, I will not kill." At that time you have perfect Buddha nature. When you say it is not possible, it is right or wrong, or you compare Buddhist precepts to Christian commandments, you lose the point. When you say, "Okay," whether to the commandments or the precepts, there we have Buddha mind or perfect mercy. So if you notice this point there is no other secret. When you listen to your inner voice directly, without even trying to listen to it, whenever you have a chance to hear it, there is the Way. There is the voice of Buddha.

Thank you very much.

Most of us understand things in terms of differences such as big or small, black or white, material or spiritual. When we say spir-itual, we mean something that is not material, but according to Buddhism, what is spiritual still belongs to the phenomenal side of reality. The other side, what we might call the ontological or noumenal side, is what you cannot see. Before "spiritual" or "material," the other side is already there. It is not something that can be understood by your small mind in terms of big or small, black or white, man or woman. To understand only in this way is to put a limitation on our actual being.

  As long as you are trying to understand reality or you yourself in phenomenal terms it is not possible. When you understand that there is something more than spiritual or material, more than right or wrong, that is reality. That is actually each one of us. To know this is to have renunciation, to be free from ideas of right or wrong, life or death, spiritual or material.

Though you try very hard to be spiritual, still you are existing

ONE	WITH	EVERYTHING	12.1

only on one side, ignoring the other side of yourself. That is why you suffer. If you really want to attain enlightenment and realize the real you, you have to go beyond ideas of good or bad, life or death. How we do this is through zazen. If something comes,let it come. Don't think about it in terms of good or bad. Let it come and let it go. That is actually zazen - to go beyond various ideas and just be yourself.

  You and others are not just spiritual or physical. Even though a person appears to be doing something wrong, who can say for sure? People may say so or you may say so, but that person is not good or bad. Society has a standard. Tentatively we have a moral code, and we say this is good and this is bad. But it may change. If the moral code or standard of judging changes, then someone who is bad today can be good tomorrow or in one or two years. Good and bad are up to the times; but things themselves - things themselves are not good or bad.

  How things go is a matter of cause and elTect. Things that exist now will cause some elTect, and that effect will cause another effect. Something that is not good and not bad is going in that way. That is reality. Not realizing this point, you tend to understand things in terms of good or bad; you think there is a good person and a bad person. But I don't understand in that way. Things are just going on. If we realize this point, that is renunciation.

  When you sit in zazen, you are you. You cannot say, "I am a good person. My practice is perfect." Of course you are perfect

- from the beginning. But it is not necessary for you to say that you are perfect. You are perfect even though you don't realize you are perfect. That is why we say we are all Buddha and our Buddha nature is constantly developing.

  We say that I am here and you are there. It is okay to say so, but actually without me you don't exist. Without you I don't
  
122	NOT	ALWAYS	SO

exist. This is very true. Since I am here, you are there. Since you are there, I am here. You may say that even though I don't corne to Tassajara, you exist here waiting for me. Maybe so, but that is not perfect understanding. I have been at 300 Page Street, which is related to everything, and you are also related to everything. I couldn't say good-bye to the building that is related to the free-way, trees, air, stars, moon, and sun. If I am related to the sun and moon as you are related to the sun and moon, then how is it pos-sible to say that I am here and you are there when we are always related?

  It is just your mind that says you are here and I am there, that's all. Originally we are one with everything. If someone dies you may say he is no more, but is it possible for something to vanish completely? That is not possible, and it is not possible for some-thing to appear aU of a sudden from nothing. Something that is here cannot vanish completely. It can change its form, that's aU. So we are always one.

  Superficially you may say you are feeling lonely, but if you are very sincere and reaUy give up your smaU mind, then there is no fear and no emotional problem. Your mind is always calm, your eyes are always open, and you can hear the birds as they sing. You can see the flowers as they open. There is nothing for you to worry about. And if you worry, you wiu see it as an interesting novel. To read it is very interesting, but it is not something to fear-or worry about. We can enjoy our life fuUy when we understand things in that way.

  When I was flying back from the East Coast the other day, I saw a beautiful sunset. The sunset lasts a pretty long time if you are flying towaros the west. People on the ground think it is dark and there is no more sun, but if you are flying high up in the sky you stiU have the sunset, and you can see beautiful clouds. It is wonderful to see, but at the same time someone may feel very lonely. Yet wherever you are, you are one with the clouds and
  
ON~  WITH   F.V~NYTIIING	III

one with the sun and the stars that you see. Even if you jump out of the airplane, you don't go anywhere else. You are stiU one with everything. That is more true than I can say, and more true than you can hear.

  I am not talking about something that is strange or mystical. If you think so, it means that you are not trlllhful enough. You are not feeling deeply enough to feel what is true. Be sincere enough to be yourself. That is the direction of our effort. Again, Dogen said that if you want to attain renunciation from birth and death, don't try to get out of birth and death. Birth and death are our equipment for this life. Without birth and death we cannot sur-vive. It is our pleasure to have birth and death. That is how we understand truth.

  In short don't be involved in making too many homemade cookies, your ideas of big or small, good or bad. Make only as many as you need. Without food you cannot survive, so it is good to make cookies, but don't make too many. It is good to have problems, and without problems we cannot survive, blll not too many. You don't need to create more problems for yourself; you have enough problems.

   If you really understand your life, it is not even necessary 10 practice zazen or even for me 10 come and stay in America. If you could make just enough homemade cookies for yourself, it would be okay for me to go back to Japan and eat Japanese cookies. Since you make too many cookies, I have to eat some. I have to help you. If we realize this point and enjoy just enough homemade cookies, that is the Buddhist way. That is how to enjoy life and that is why we practice zazen. We do not practice zazen to attain special enlightenment. Just to be ourselves and just to be free from our useless efforts or tendencies, we practice zazen.

Thank you very much.

Wherever You Are, Enlightenment is There
In our practice the most important thing is to realize that we have Buddha nature. Intellectually we may know this, but it is rather difficult to accept. Our everyday life is in the realm of good and bad, the realm of duality, while Buddha nature is found in the realm of the absolute where there is no good and no bad. There is a twofold reality. Our practice is to go beyond the realm of good and bad and to realize the absolute. It may be rather diffi-cult to understand.

  Hashimoto Roshi, a famous Zen master who passed away in 1965, said that the way we UapaneseJ cook is to prepare each ingredient separately. Rice is here and pickles are over there. But when you put them in your tummy, you don't know which is which. The soup, rice, pickles, and everything get all mixed up. That is the world of the absolute. As long as rice, pickles, and soup remain separate, they are not working. You are not being nourished. That is like your intellectual understanding or book knowledge-it remains separate from your actual life.

Zazen practice is mixing the various ways we have of understanding and letting it all work together. A kerosene lamp wiu not work merely because it is fIlled with kerosene. It also needs air for combustion, and even with air, it needs matches. By the aid of matches, air, and kerosene, the lamp wiu work. This is our zazen practice.

  In the same way, even though you say, "I have Buddha nature," that alone is not enough to make it work. If you do not have a friend or a Sangha, it won't work. When we practice with the aid of the Sangha, helped by Buddha, we can practice zazen in its true sense. We will have bright light here in the Tassajara zendo or in our daily life.

  To have a so-called enlightenment experience is of course important, but what is more important is to know how to adjust the /lame in zazen and in our everyday life. When the /lame is in complete combustion, you don't smell the oil. When it is smoky you will smell something. You may realize that it is a kerosene lamp. When your life is in complete combustion you have no complaint, and there is no need to be aware of your practice. If we talk too much about zazen, it is already a smoky kerosene lamp.

  Maybe I am a very smoky kerosene lamp. I don't necessarily want to give a lecture. I just want to live with you: moving stones, having a nice hot spring bath, and eating something good. Zen is right there. When I start to talk, it is already a smoky kerosene lamp. As long as I must give a lecture, I have to explain: "This is right practice, this is wrong, this is how to practice zazen ...." It is like giving you a recipe. It doesn't work. You cannot eat a recipe.

  Usually a Zen master will say: "Practice zazen, then you will attain enlightenment. If you attain enlightenment you will be detached from everything, and you wiu see tlri/lgs as it is." Of course this is true, but our way is not always so. We are studying
  
WHEREVER	YOU	ARE,	ENLIGHTENMENT	IS	THERE	129

how to adjust the flame of our lamp back and forth. Dogen Zenji makes this point in the Silobogeuzo. His teaching is to live each moment in complete combustion like a lamp or a candle. To live each moment, becoming one with everything, is the point of his teaching and his practice.

  Zazen practice is a very subtle thing. When you practice zazen, you become aware of things you did not notice while you were working. Today I moved stones for a while, and I didn't realize that my muscles were tired. But when I was calmly sitting zazen, I realized, "Oh! My muscles are in pretty bad condition." I felt some pain in the various parts of my body. You might think you could practice zazen much better if you had no problem, but actually some problem is necessary. It doesn't have to be a big one. Through the difficulty you have you can practice zazen. This is an especially meaningful point, which is why Dogen Zenji says, "Practice and enlightenment are one." Practice is something you do consciously, something you do with eITort. There! Right there is enlightenment.

  Many Zen masters missed this point while they were striving to attain perfect zazen: things that exist are imperfect. That is how everything actually exists in this world. Nothing we see or hear is perfect. But right there in the imperfection is perfect reality. It is true intellectually and also in the realm of practice. It is true on paper and true with our body.

  You think that you can only establish true practice after you attain enlightenment, but it is not so. True practice is established in delusion, in frustration. If you make some mistake, that is where to establish your practice. There is no other place for you to establish your practice.

  We talk about enlightenment, but in its true sense perfect enlightenment is beyond our understanding, beyond our experi-ence. Even in our imperfect practice enlightenment is there.
  
')0  NOT	ALWAYS	SO

We just don't know it. So the point is to find the true meaning of practice before we attain enlightenment. Wherever you are, enlightenment is there. [f you stand up right where you are, that is enlightenment.

  This is called [-don't-know zazen. We don't know what zazen is anymore. [don't know who [ am. To find complete compo-sure when you don't know who you are or where you are, that is to accept I/,i"gs as il is. Even though you don't know who you are, you accept yourself. That is "you" in its true sense. When you know who you are, that "you" will not be the real you. You may overestimate yourself quite easily, but when you say, "Oh, [ don't know:' then you are you, and you know yourself com-pletely. That is enlightenment.

  [ think our teaching is very, very good, but if we become arro-gant and believe in ourselves too much we will be lost. There will be no teaching, no Buddhism at all. When we find the joy of our life in our composure, we don't know what it is, we don't understand anything, then our mind is very great, very wide. Our mind is open to everything, so it is big enough to know before we know something. We are grateful even before we have some-thing. Even before we attain enlightenment, we are happy to practice our way. Otherwise we cannot attain anything in its true sense.

Thank you very much.

Not Sticking to Enlightenment

Hui Neng, the Sixth Ancestor, said, "To dwell on emptiness and to keep a calm mind is not z.azen," He also said, "Just to sit in a cross-legged posture is not Zen," At the same time I always say to you, 'Just sit," If you don't understand what our practice is and stick to the words, you will be confused, but if you understand what real Zen is, you will know that the Ancestor's words are a kind of warning for us,

  Now our sesshin is almost at an end, and soon you will be going back to your homes and becollling involved in your every-day activity, If you have been practicing true zazen, you Illay be happy to go back to your everyday life, You may feel encouraged to go back, but if you feel hesitant to go back to your city life or everyday life, it means that you still stick to z.azen, That is why the Sixth Ancestor said, "If you dwell on emptiness, and stick to your practice, then that is not true zazen,"

  When you practice zazen, moment after moment, you accept what you have now, in this moment, and you are satisfied with everything you do, Because you just accept it, you don't have any
  
IJ2	NOT	ALWAYS	SO

complaints. That is zazen. Even if you cannot do that, you know what to do. Then sitting zazen will encourage you to do other things as weU. Just as you accept your painful legs while sitting, you accept your everyday life, which may be more difficult than your zazen practice.

   If you come to have a taste of real practice, especially in this seven-day sitting, and then return to your busy activity without losing the taste of practice, that will be a great encouragement. Even though it is difficult, and even though you are busy, you will always have the taste of calmness in your mind, not because you stick to it, but because you enjoy it. When you enjoy it, you don't have to stick to it. So if you have a real taste of our practice, you can enjoy it aU the time, whatever you do.

  You may think you have attained enlightenment, but if you are busy or in some difficulty and think you need to have that expe-rience again, that is not real enlightenment, because it is some-thing you are sticking to. Real enlightenment is always with you, so there is no need for you to stick to it or even to think about it. Because it is always with you, difficulty itself is enlightenment. Your busy life itself is enlightened activity. That is true enlight-enment.

  Nowadays young people are dating, but enlightenment is not something that you can meet on a date. If you organize your life, get up at a certain time, pick up your bag lunch at a certain time, and leave for work, then if you have a girlfriend or boyfriend, you will meet them. There is no need to make a date. At a certain time she will come to the corner where you usually see her. That is our way. It is rather foolish and troublesome to make phone caUs. Even if you make a date by telephone-"Hey,1 am leaving now"-if she doesn't come to the corner, you will be disap-pointed. If you do not make a date, and she comes to the corner, you will be reaUy happy.
  
NOT	STiCKIN(;	TO	[NUCIITF.NMf.NT	133

  That is how you allain enlightenment. It is not a laughing mailer. I am talking about something real. Not to make any date means not to expect or stick to enlightenment. When you are encouraged by enlightenment, then seeing her, even just a glimpse of her, is enough. All day long you will be happy. If you are demanding too much of her, then it already means that you stick to enlightenment.

  That is what the Sixth Ancestor meant when he said, '1ust to dweU on emptiness is not true practice." Originally he allained enlightenment by one famous statement: "Without dwelling on anything, you have true mind." So if you stick to something, you will lose your enlightenment. Even though you try hard to make a date or an appointment, it doesn't work. The enlightenment you allain in that way is something that you stick to, not some-thing that is always with you, that always encourages you.

  This point is very important. Even after we finish our sesshin, continue to practice in your everyday lives and have real enlight-enment. This was a very fruitful sesshin, and some of you had a good taste of our practice. Even if you haven't, I think you understand how to practice zazen. So from now on just continue to practice sincerely according to the right instruction of your teacher, and someday you will have a taste of it.

Thank you very much.
Usually when we practice we expect something: if we try hard, our practice will improve. If we aim at a goal in our practice, we will eventually reach it. We have the idea that our practice will improve day by day, and it will help our health and mental condi-tion. This is true, but it is not a complete understanding.

  We also do zazen with the understanding that the goal is not reached in one or rwo years, but is right here. Here is the goal of practice. When you practice with this understanding, you take care of many things and you remain concentrated, completely involved in the practice you have right now. That is why we have various instructions, so that you can practice hard enough to feel the goal of practice right now, as you are doing it.

  You may say, "My practice is not good enough to feel the goal or the full meaning right now." But even though you say your practice is not good enough, there is no other practice for you right now. Good or bad, it is your practice. To approach perfect practice, there is no way other than to accept yourself. To say your practice is bad does not help your practice. To say your practice is excellent does not help. Your practice is your practice.
You are lalking abom il in various ways, good or bad, Ihal is all. We should know Ihis poim fim of all, so we say, "Even Ihough your praclice is nOI so good, Ihat is perfecl praclice. JUSI sil."

  Hearing Ihis, you may undemand il objeclively and use il as an excuse: "Anyway, we arc silling here in Ihe zendo, so Ihal is per-fecI praclice. There is no need 10 encourage ourselves, and Ihere is no need to sit all day long. If we sit a lillie bil, Ihal is okay, even one period is enough." ThaI kind of underslanding is very superficial. You have no underslanding from your subjeclive side.

  Trulh is always here. BUI jusl 10 say so, when you are nOI aClually practicing Ihe !rUlh, is whal we call a "paimed cake," a piclure of a cake Ihal you cannol cal. Even Ihough you are sil-ling, you are ealing a paimed cake. So there is no las Ie, and you will give up because il doesn'l mean anylhing: "II doesn'l result in anylhing, so il may be beller 10 go dow mown 10 eal somelhing, inslead of eating Ihe food Zen Cemer provides."

  You may be pleased when people call you a Zen slUdem. Then your praclice is encouraging your ego, bUl you are nOI prac-licing Zen. When you sil like Ihal, Zen does nOI mean anylhing. True zazen cannOI be like Ihal. If Zen were like Ihal, il would have vanished from Ihis world a long lime ago. Zen is slill alive because of Ihe olher side of Ihe muh. Various anceslors and greal sages of Buddhism have said, "Buddha left this leachingjusl for me, nOl for anyone else. Buddha lefl 'I1,e LolliS SII/ra jusl for Nichiren." If Ihal side is forgollen, Ihe Buddha's leaching is nOlhing bm waslepaper. "Just for me" is nOI arrogance. II means you have full apprecialion of Ihe leaching as your own.

  ThaI is Ihe spiril we need in our zazen praclice. Everyone can be Nichiren; everyone can be Dogen or Bodhidharma. Because I practice zazen, Ihere is Buddha, Ihere is Dogen and Bodhid-hanna, and Ihere is Buddha's leaching. You realize Ihal you are the only being in Ihis world, and Ihal no one can lake over your
1)6	NOT	ALWAYS	SO

position. That is true-all the teaching is just for you. When you are young, you have no such feeling. You think you will live fifty or even one hundred years more, so today is not so valuable to you. If you become my age, you will really feel, "I am just this one being. No one can take over my position, so 1 must not fool myself."

  This point is very important for everyone, but especially for those who practice our way. Without this confidence or under-standing, you will expose the weakness of your practice: "Oh, no, I am not good enough. Look at me-I cannot practice zazen. Zen is so beautiful and so perfect, but it is impossible for me to do this practice." You will feel the weaknesses of your character and of your conduct, and being preoccupied in this way, you won't be able to sit. But whatever you say about yourself, you are the only one. You cannot escape, because the whole world is yours. This is beyond the truth that we can talk about. This is ultimate truth.

  How can you deny the fact that you are the only one? You can criticize yourself; that is easy. But when you accept the fact that you are the only one, you have no time to say "good practice" or "bad practice." Because you turn a deaf ear to this truth, you have time to criticize yourself. When you realize this point, you can hear or see the truth, and you can practice zazen. You can accept the truth, whatever it is. To practice is to open yourself up to everything you see as an embodiment of the truth. This is why we practice zazen, why everyone can join our practice, and why this practice includes every activity in your life.

  This is not a practice that can be compared to other practices as a means of attaining something. From the experiences of many people, instructions were accumulated for the forms we use and the way we breathe, just as scientific knowledge is accumu-lated. But Buddhist wisdom puts emphasis on the subjective side
  
THF.	TF.IICIIING	JUST	FOR	YOU	1)7

of the truth. That is why we say everyone is Buddha. That is how we transmit Huddha's teaching to everyone. [t is not just a paper transmission. The subjective side has always been with us, and this point has always been emphasized without losing the objective side of the truth.

  Sometimes people who call themselves "spiritual" ignore the objective side of the truth. That is also a nustake, but to be caught by the objective side of the truth and rely on it with an idle attitude will not help. Even though we can go to the moon, it doesn't help so much. As long as we rely on objective, scientific truth, it doesn't help. Only when each one of us feels the truth, appreciates, accepts, and is ready to follow the truth, will it work. When someone puts himself outside of the truth in order to study the truth, he won't know what to do when something happens to him.

  [n an ancient Chinese story, there was a person who liked drag-ons very much. He talked about dragons, he painted dragons, and he bought various kinds of dragons. So there was a dragon who thought, "[f a real dragon like me visited him, he would be very happy." One day the real dragon sneaked into his room, and the man didn't know what to do! Wl,aaail! He could not even run away. He could not even stand up. For a long time we have been like the man who admired dragons, but we should not just be the dragon's friend or adnurer; we should be the dragon itself. Then we will not be afraid of any dragon.

  So we are ready to study our way subjectively as well as objec-tively. When you practice in this way, zazen will become your own zazen, and as you are Huddha, you will express your true nature in various ways. That is freedom from the forms of practice. Whatever you do, you will really be you. You will be Buddha, in its true sense. There is a big dilTerence between prac-
  
1)8	NOT	ALWAYS	SO

tice with this understanding and lazy practice with poor, super-ficial understanding of form, instruction, and teaching. After all, as Buddha said, there is no one you can rely on, so you should be the boss of everything. Then you will understand Buddha's teaching and our practice as your own.

Thank you very much.

Stand Up by the Ground

When we talk about reality, it is to understand how to practice our way in zazen and in our everyday life. Dogen Zenji talked about the nature of reality by using the Chinese or Japanese word, , which can mean "like this" or "just this," but can also be a question, "What is this?"

   can also be "it." In English you say, "It is hot." That "it" is the same word, the same meaning as when you say, "It is nine o'clock." You use "it" for the time or the weather, but not only for the time or weather, everything is actually "it." "We" are also "it," you know, but we don't say "it." Instead of "it" we say "he" or "she," "me" or " .." But actually we mean, "it." So if every-thing is "it," it is at the same time a question mark. When I say "it," you won't know exactly what I mean, so you may ask, "What
is 'it'?"

  When we talk about time, "it" may be mealtime or lecture time. We don't know, so "it" may be a question mark for every-one. You may say, "What time is it?" or "Is it time for lecture?" So "it" or ;",,,,0 is something definite, and at the same time, a
  
140	NOT	ALWAYS	SO

question. And this is very important for us to know. Right now "it" is hot, but "it" is not always hot. Sometime "it" will be cold.

  When we talk about time, we can see that time is continuous and also that time is definite. When we say "it" is half-past eight, we point out a certain time. Now time is discontinuous. But time by its nature is continuous, so the one word has two sides: continuity and discontinuity. That is the nature of reality.

  Dogen Zenji talks about practice not as something special, but something continuous, something mixed up with everything. He says: "If you fall on the ground, stand up by the ground." Does it make sense? If you fall on the ground, you stand up by the ground in that place. Also he says, "If you fall on the ground, stand up by emptiness, by nothing." Without discussing why this is so, we cannot have a complete understanding of our teaching.

  Actually we stand up by the ground like this, but he says that we shouldn't. What does it mean? If you think you can always stand up by the ground, and don't mind falling on the ground, you will fall on the ground quite easily. You will have the idea: "It is all right. If I fall to the ground, I can stand up by the ground." If we practice with this kind of prejudice or easy idea, that is wrong practice.

  This point is important. It is like enlightenment. If you rely on enlightenment, you will be someone who easily makes mis-takes or falls on the ground, relying on the help of the ground. Do you understand? It is a very subtle point. Of course we have to stand up by the ground, but if we stick to the idea of the help of the ground all the time, we will lose the true meaning of the fall to the ground. In other words. even though we make a mis-take, we should not make the same mistake many. many times. thinking it is all right because we know how to get up.

  This is not what we mean when we say reality. Things do not happen twice in the same way. The ground is not always the
  
STAND	ur  8Y   TilE   GROUND	141

same. It can be a stick sometimes, or it can be a stone. It can even be water. The ground is "it," you know. "It" means every-thing, not just "ground." It means to practice our way without trying to repeat the same experience.

  So there is nothing to rely on in our practice. But on the other hand, there is always something provided for you, always. According to the circumstances, you will have some aid to prac-tice our way. Even the pain in your legs is an aid. By the pain you have, you practice our way. The pain is "it." "It" is every-thing, but at that time, "it" is some definite experience or partic-ular trouble. "It" can be drowsiness; "it" can be hunger; "it" can be hot weather. So hot weather or nice cool weather, or hunger, or mosquitoes, or the pain in your legs can be an aid to your prac-tice with which you can stand up and establish your practice. So not only Buddha's teaching, but everything can be an aid to us.

   /IIIIIIO-j; means "things," and ;1111110-11;11 is someone who is prac-ticing zazen. "Someone practicing something"-that is reality. Or we could say, "someone doing something." Then ;1111110 is a discontinuous, particular being which has form and color. But as Dogen Zenji says, Zen practice is something continuous, some-thing mixed up with everything.

  If it is so, then "someone doing zazen" already includes every-thing. Someone cannot be separate from this world. Some action cannot exist without the background of the whole world, and some thing cannot be apart from other things. So "some-one," "doing," and "something" is the same thing, you know. If they are the same thing, then we can say "something" "some-thing" "something." What is that? That is complete realization. Everything happens in this way. So if you stick to the idea of help or enlightenment, that is already a mistake. You have sepa-rated yourself from everything.

Someone may say, "Oh, he studies Soto Zen, but he denies the

'42	NOT	ALWAYS	SO

enlightenment experiencc." It is not so. We Soto students do not stick to anything. We havc complete frecdom of practice, complete freedom of cxpres.~ion. Our practice is the living cxpression of our truc nature or realiry. So for us it is not possiblc to stick to anything. Moment after momcnt, we practice in a renewed, refreshed way.

  Our practice should be indcpcndcnt from past practice and future practice. We cannot sacrifice our present practice for some future attainment, because aU the Buddhas attained enlighten-ment in this way, and aU the Buddhas in thc future wiu attain enlightenment in this way. In this way means not any particular way. Sometimes it may be Soto way, sometimes R.inzai. Accord-ing to the circumstances, it may bc the way of another school.

  Someone may attain enlightenment when he sees a Rower or hears a sound. Someone may attain enlightenment whcn taking a hot bath or going to the rest room. Rich and poor may attain enlightenment in various ways. So actually there is not a Soto way or a Rinzai way.

  We have discusscd praC[ice rather abstractly, but this is what it means: whatever it is, we should accept it. By various means moment after moment, we practice our way. There is no other way to attain enlightenment.

Thank you very much.

Just Enough Problems

This is the seventh and last day of our sesshin. We have already come this far, so we cannot give up! The only way is to stay here. I feel I have a very good crop. You may feel you are not yet ripe, but even though you are still ripening, if you stay in our store-house, you will be good apples. So I have nothing to worry about, and I don't think you have any reason to worry about your practice either.

  Some of you may have started this sesshin because you had many problems. You thought that if you sat here for seven days your problems would be solved, but whatever problems you may have, they can be solved anyway. Buddha will not give you more problems than you can solve, or more than you need. Whatever the problems are, they are just enough. If these are not enough problems. Buddha is ready to give you more, just so you can appreciate your problems. Buddha is always giving you some-thing. If you have nothing to cope with, your life feels empty. So I think you should trust Buddha. A life without problems is like sitting in this zendo for seven days without doing anything.
  
144	NOT	AI.WAYS	SO

  Here in the zendo meditating for seven days, you have had many problems. You might think you have more problems while sitting than you have in your daily life. Actually you arc finding the problems you have had all along, but didn't notice because you were fooled by something. When you are not aware of your problems, they will appear unexpectedly. No problem will appear that you did not originally have, but because you overlook it, you do not expect it. So it is better to see your problems as soon as possible.

  Soto students sit zazen facing the wall. Buddha is there behind you, and you are trusting him. If you trust completely, there is no need to face Buddha. This is an attitude of complete trust. Your enemies or problems will come from the back, not from the front. So to expose your back to Buddha means to express complete trust in the Buddha.

  Even though you feel you have too many problems, when you trust in Buddha, you sit with your problems. At the same time, you should be ready to refuse a problem if it is too much. Bud-dha may say, "If you really don't need it, I will accept it at any time. Give it back to me." But more and more the problem will change into something you need. You will think, "If I refuse this problem, I may regret it. Since I am not so sure whether this is a real problem or Buddha's help, maybe it is better to keep it." If you sit in this way, you will find that your problems are valuable treasures that are indispensable for you.

  Before you accept the problems you have in your position, you cannot accept yourself as you are. You cannot sit in a true way. When you steady your mind, trust Buddha, and just sit, there is no confusion or problem anymore. When you are patient enough and wait until the problem makes some sense to you, you can appreciate your being here and your position, whatever it may be. That is how you practice zazen.
  
JUST	ENOUGH	PR08UMS	14S

  When you practice zazen, there is no need to expect Buddha to help you solve your problems. Buddha is already helping you, but usually we refuse Buddha's offer. When you ask for help, you are asking for something that has not yet arrived. You are refus-ing to accept the treasure you already have. You are like a pig. When I w.JS young, as my father w.JS very poor, he raised pigs. If you give pigs a bucket of food, as long as you remain there they will not eat it, expecting you to give them more food. If you move away too quickly, they will kick over the food bucket chas-ing after you. So you must be very careful.

  I think that is what you do. Instead of working with the prob-lems you have, you cause yourself more problems by seeking for something else. But there is no need to seek for anything. You have plenty of problems,just enough. This is a mysterious thing, the mystery of life. We have just enough problems, not too many and not too few. So there is no need to ask anyone's help.

  If you are patient enough, if you are strong enough to accept your problems, then you can sit calmly and peacefully, trusting Buddha and trusting your own being. Because you are helped, and the w.Jy you are helped is perfect, you exist here. If it is too much, you will die, and if it is too little, you will die. You are receiving just what you need. So the only way is to trust Buddha, to trust your being here. That is what we call Zen.

  You may think all the Zen masters are very tough. He looks tough when you need him to be tough, but he is not so tough-he is just tough enough for you, that's aU! Actually, you don't need your master, if you know how to practice zazen.

  I w.Jnt you just to sit and to be ready to go to the marketplace as ripe apples. Let's sit with full appreciation for our practice.

Thank you very much.

Sun-Faced Buddha, Moon-Faced Buddha

Lately I have been sick, and because I have been practicing zazen for many years, some people may say, "He will not catch cold or sulfer from the flu ... but isn't it funny he stayed in bed so long?" We may believe that zazen will make us physically strong and mentally healthy, but a healthy mind is not just healthy in the usual sense, and a weak body is not just a weak body. Whether it is weak or strong, when that weakness or strength is based on what we call truth, or Buddha nature, then that is a healthy mind and a healthy body.

  My voice may not be very good yet, but today I'm testing it. Whether it works or not, or if I speak or not, is not a big prob-lem. Whatever happens to us is something that should happen. The purpose of our practice is to have this kind of complete composure.

  In the Blue Cliff Record there is a koan concerning Baso Doitsu. Baso was big and physically very strong, a man of great stature. Once when Baso was ill, the monk who took care of the temple
  
SUN-fACr:[)	HUOOHA,	MOON-I:ACr:O	BUUUIIA	147

came to visit him and asked, "How are you doing? Are you weU, or not?" And Baso said, "Sun-faced Buddha, Moon-faced Buddha."

  The Sun-faced Buddha is supposed to live for one thousand eight hundred years. And the Moon-faced Buddha lives only one day and one night. When I am sick, I may be the Moon-faced Buddha. When I am heahhy, I am the Sun-faced Buddha. But the Sun-faced Buddha or the Moon-faced Buddha has no special meaning. Whether I am ill or healthy, I am slilJ practicing zazen. There is no difference. Even though I am in bed, I am Buddha. So don't worry about my health.

  This is quite simple. Whatever happens to Baso, he can accept t/rillgs as it is, but we cannot accept everything. We may accept something we think is good, but if we dislike something we won't accept it. And we compare things: "He is a true Zen master, and he is not," or, "he is a good Zen student, but I am not." That kind of understanding may be quite usual, bm finaUy you cannot fig-ure out which idea is reliable.

  The point is to anain complete composure. Ordinary effort associated with comparative thinking will not help you. To anain enlightenment means we have complete composure in our life, without any discrimination. At the same time this docs not mean to stick to the anitude of non-discrimination, because that is also a kind of discrimination.

  When I was still in Japan, I had some Zen students. Some of them were very rich and inRuential; others were students, carpen-ters, or other kinds of workers. In Japan we treat some people, a mayor or a teacher, in a different way. We have a special way of speaking to them. But I always told my students, "If you are a Zen student you should forget aU about your position, work, or title. Otherwise you cannot practice zazen in its true sense."
When	you  are  sitting  I  say,  "Don't	think."  "Don't  think"

148	NOT	ALWAYS	SO

means not to treat things in terms of good or bad, heavy or light. Just accept II/ings as il is. Even though you do not think, you may hear something; and usually the moment you hear it, your reac-tion is, "What could it be?" "That is a car," or "That's very noisy. Maybe it's a motorcycle."

  In zazen you should just hear the big noise or the small noise, and not be bothered by it. It may seem impossible, especially for a beginner, because the moment you hear it, a reaction follows. But, if you practice zazen, if you continuously just accept I/(i"~s as il is, eventually you can do it. The way you can do it is to con-centrate on your posture or your breathing.

  In Japan the samurai practiced zazen to master the sword. As long as he was afraid of losing his life, he could not act with his full ability. When he was free from the idea of killing or being killed, he could just react to his enemy's activity, and win. If he tried to win, he might lose. So practicing how to act without fear, which limits your activity, is the most important thing. Although it was a mailer of surviving on the battlefield, the samurai fought his fight in the zendo.

  When we don't have that kind of circumstance in our every-day life, we don't feel the same necessity to practice. But our human problems are created because we make an effort to achieve something, and this limits our activity. Then we cannot achieve anything.

  We should understand our everyday activity in two ways, and be able to react either way without a problem. One way is to understand dualistically-good or bad, right or wrong-and we try hard to understand things in these terms. Yet we should also be able to let go of this dualistic understanding. Then everything is one. That is the other understanding, the understanding of oneness.

So you should be able to understand or accept things in these

SUN-fACU>	BUnnllA,	MOON-FACE!)	BU!)!)HA	149

two ways, but this is not enough. It is still dualistic. Without thinking, "This is one of two understandings," you have the free-dom to move from one to the other. Then you wiII not be caught by your understanding. Whatever you do wiII be the great activity of practice.

  The Sun-faced Buddha is good; the Moon-faced Buddha is good. Whatever it is, that is good-aU things are Buddha. And there is no Buddha, even. When you do not understand Buddha, you wiII be concerned if I say there is no Buddha: "You are a priest, so how can you say there is no Buddha? Why do you chant? Why do you bow to Buddha?" There is no Buddha so we bow to Buddha. If you bow to Buddha because there is Buddha, that is not a true understanding of Buddha. Sun-faced Buddha, Moon-faced Buddha - no problem. Whether I am at Tassajara or San Francisco, no problem. Even though I die, it is aU right with me, and it is aU right with you. And if it is not all right, you are not a Zen student. It is lJuile aU right. That is Buddha.

  If I suITer while I am dying, that is suffering Buddha, and there is no confusion in it. Maybe everyone wiII struggle because of physical agony or spiritual agony, but that is not a problem. We should be very grateful to have a limited body like yours or mine. If you had a limitless life, it would be a great problem for you.

  On my wife's favorite TV program there are some ghosts of people who lived long ago. They appear in this world, and create many problems for themselves and others. That is what happens. A human being is a human being, and we can enjoy our life only with our limited body. This limitation is vital. Without limita-tion nothing exists, so we should enjoy it: weak body, strong body; man or woman. The only way to enjoy our life is to enjoy the limitation that is given to us.
"Sun-faced Buddha, Moon-faced Buddha" does not mean to

ISO	NOT	ALWAYS	SO

be indifferent: "I don't care whether it'~ the Sun-faced Buddha or the Moon-faced Buddha." It means that whatever it is, we just enjoy it. This is also beyond non-attachment, because when our attachment reaches the point of non-attachment, that is real attachment. If you are attached to something, be attached to something completely. SUN-FACED BUDDHA, MOON-FACED BUDDHA! "I am here. I am right here." This kind of confidence is important. When you have this kind of confidence in yourself, in your being, you can practice true zazen beyond perfect or imperfect, good or bad.

Thank you very much.

Sitting like a Frog
Recently on a calendar I saw one of Sengai's drawings of a frog along with Sengai's saying, "If we can become a Buddha by the practice of silting...." He doesn't say anything more, but we

can imagine what the frog is thinking: "If people can become a Buddha by the practice of silting, then I too can be a Buddha." [laughs) For those of us who have some understanding of prac-tice, when we see someone silting to attain enlightenment, we may think, "Oh, he is silting like a frog."

  Actually a frog's way of silting is much better than our zazen. I always admire their practice. They never get sleepy. Their eyes are always open, and they do things intuitively in an appropriate way. When something to eat comes by, they go like this: elllp! They never miss anything, they are always calm and still. I wish I could be a frog.

  If you understand what Sengai is saying in his picture of a frog, you have already understood what Zen is. There is a lot of humor in his picture and a good understanding of our practice. Even though our practice is not belter than a frog's, we continue
  
Ip	NOT	ALWAYS	SO

to sit. When you have been practicing for a pre try long time, you wiU laugh, pardy at someone who is involved in the wrong idea of practice, and pardy at yourself who is always sitting, without doing anything, without making much progres.~. You will laugh at yourself. When you can laugh at yourself, there is enlighten-ment.

  Still your zazen may be a beginner's zazen or sometimes worse than a beginner's. Sometimes I 3m ashamed of myself when I see a student who is practicing very weU: "Oh, he is very good." I wish I could be that young again, but it is too late. Anyway, our practice cannot be better than a frog sitting, but that is okay. To see someone practicing good zazen is inspiring, not only for me, but for everyone. If your zazen is good enough to give a good impression, then your zazen is pretry good even though you don't think so. Likewise, even though you think your zazen is very good and you are proud of your enlightenment experience, if your zazen does not inspire anyone, it may be wrong practice.

  When we talk about the precepts we say not to do this or not to do that, but if you are doing something good like zazen you cannot do something bad at the same time. If you continue to do something good, that is how to observe our precepts. So the point is just to sit, forgetting all about fame or profit. Just sit for the sake of zazen. That is to have real way-seeking mind, to find out your inmost desire.

  The practice of way-seeking mind will sharpen your intuition. Then you will have less difficulry knowing what to choose. To make a choice you try to know what is good and what is bad, so that by comparing one thing to another you can buy or get some-thing good. Maybe you are trying to pick out fabric from all the various colors and materials, but even though you spend two or three days you may end up getting something that is not appro-priate for you. You will return to the same store. If they exchange it for something else, you are lucky.
  
SITTING	LIKE	A	FROG	15)

  Don't say this kind of practice is useles.~. [t is actually the first step on our way. How to have good practice and how to buy something appropriate for yourself is the same. When you are not overly involved in it and shopping too much, then you can get something appropriate.

  When you know the secret of how to use your intuitive sense, your activiry will be free from v:lrious restrictions, and you will find your way in your everyday life. Until you understand why we practice zazen and what is actually true activiry, intuitive activ-iry, free from various desires and restrictions, it is difficult to figure out what is good practice. Still it is okay to continue practicing, and little by little without knowing how to acquire that kind of intuitive activiry, you will get it anyway. So it is rather foolish to be involved in some hard special practice. Zazen practice is hard enough, and only through zazen practice have various teachers attained-there is no other word, so [ sayattained-en[ighten-ment and become real Buddhists.

  [f you understand real practice, then archery or other activities can be Zen. [f you don't understand how to practice archery in its true sense, then even though you practice very hard, what you acquire is just technique. [t won't help you through and through. Perhaps you can hit the mark without trying, but without a bow and arrow you cannot do anything. [f you understand the point of practice, then even without a bow and arrow the archery will help you. How you get that kind of power or abiliry is only through right practice. Dogen Zenji says that to have right prac-tice is to have a good teacher and to receive right guidance. Otherwise you will not understand Zen.

  Just to continue this right practice or fundamental practice is the most important thing.

Thank you very much.

