Real Precepts Are Beyond Words
When I say "precepts," what you will think of is something like the Ten Commandments or the grave Prohibitory Precepts. But Zen precepts are not like that. To start with, the phrase "Zen precepts" means understanding zazen. So another interpretation of zazen is the precepts. Using words, we explain what Zen actually is. The purpose of receiving the precepts is not just to remember what you should or what you should not do. The way we observe precepts is by practicing Zen, or by extending our practice to our daily life. So our idea of precepts is completely different from the usual understanding of precepts.
The foundation or true meaning of the precepts is based on the various ways of understanding the one reality which is always with you, the reality which is not divisible into three, or sixteen, or ten. Tentatively, we divide. We explain from various angles. But that is just words. Real precepts are beyond words. We cannot talk about it. If we talk about it, already it is no longer the precepts. So if you think the meaning of the precepts is just to observe various rules, your understanding is very far away from the true understanding of the real precepts.
The first of the sixteen precepts we observe is the one reality which cannot be divided into three or sixteen. It is the precept of one reality. You may call it emptiness or you may call it the absolute. That is the first precept we receive and observe. All the precepts start from this precept. Without understanding this precept, our sixteen precepts don’t make any sense.Whatever there is in this world or this universe, whatever kinds of rules we have or whatever kind of truth we can observe, all those are included in this big scale of the precepts. We understand the precepts in various ways. Scientists understand in their own way and religious people understand in a religious way. There must be various ways of understanding it. But what we study, what we observe, is the one precept. That is what we receive when we receive the sixteen precepts. You may understand, then, that how you receive the precepts is to just practice zazen, just to be yourself. Then you can observe the precepts.
It looks like I am talking about something like heaven, but it is not so. I am talking about each one of you, and myself, and about water, and about stuff. When stuff is really stuff, stuff includes everything. When you just practice zazen on your black cushion, your practice includes everything and you practice zazen with Buddha, with the patriarchs, and with all sentient beings. That is what I repeat, over and over. Whether your practice is good or bad, it doesn’t matter. If you accept your practice as your own, then that practice includes everything. At that time, you have the precepts which include everything, as absolute being includes everything.
We say that something which includes everything is the absolute. But, actually, it is more than that. It is beyond our understanding. You may think that if you add up all the beings which exist in this universe that that is the absolute. But it is not so because the absolute cannot be understood by your mind. Something which you understand is already not absolute, because your mind limits the real understanding of the absolute. When you don’t understand and just sit, when you become just a stone, or stuff, then you include everything. That is our zazen practice. This is such an important point for us. If you lose this point, you will easily be caught by some idea, or some experience, in your practice. "My practice is good, very good. Recently I saw Buddha in zazen. [laughs] All the Buddhas came to me and admired my practice." We are laughing, but that kind of practice exists and some people practice this kind of practice very sincerely. It is good practice, but even so, the practice of just sitting is beyond comparison. Just to sit is much better than to see all the Buddhas in the world. Do you understand why? That is the point, to know what an important practice it is just to be yourself.
Before I could read English, Alan Watts (helped me to express this), "When stone is completely stone, that is real stone." He put this Zen expression into words. When a stone is a stone through and through, that is really a stone. Not only is it really a stone, but when it is really a stone, it includes everything. When it is not a stone, someone may kick it , but when it is really a stone, you cannot do anything with it. When a stone is really a stone you cannot pick it up. Even though you think you picked it up, it is still part of the universe. You cannot pick up the whole universe. If you say you can pick up the whole universe, where are you? If you are a ghost, you are outside the universe, where are you? If you are a ghost, outside the universe, that is just delusion. Nothing exists outside of the universe. All that exists is within the universe. So, thinking that you picked up a stone is a big delusion. Stone is still stone. You cannot do anything with it. If you understand this point and sit zazen, that is how you receive the precepts. This is the only way to observe perfect precepts. There is no other way to observe the precepts. This is called the indivisible precepts.
We say Buddha, Dharma and Sangha. I have been talking about the Buddha precept, which cannot be divided into three. The next one is the Dharma precept which is the law of the universe. There is some way in which things are always going. If you throw something up, it will eventually come to the earth because of the law of gravity. So there are some rules in the way things exist. So if we say rule, or law, that rule or law includes everything. Nothing is free from that law. That is Dharma. You may say you have complete freedom., but if you exist outside the law, you are a ghost. That is your own delusion. Actually nothing exists outside of the rules. That is why the second precept is called the pure law, or pure precept. "Pure" means non-dualistic. When something is in duality, it is not pure. Usually, when you say "pure," it is the opposite of "impure." And when you say "good," "good" is the opposite of "bad." Good and bad are a pair of opposites. Then there is already separation. When we say "pure," it means non-duality.
When you sit, if you say, "My practice is good," that is already dualistic. Whether you say "good practice" or "bad practice," you are right there, sitting. You cannot say good practice or bad practice. There is some reason why someone’s practice is the way it is. If someone cannot sit with a straight back there is some reason. So you cannot say good or bad. That is how he or she practices zazen. For her there is no other way to sit. She is making her best effort, and she practices zazen just to make her effort. She is sitting to be a complete being. She is sitting, not to attain enlightenment or to keep from falling into hell. She is just sitting. No one can criticize her practice. If she criticizes her practice, she is not making her best effort. When she is making her best effort, she cannot criticize, and she will not feel regretful about her practice. That is her own practice. To continue this kind of practice, day after day, is the way we exist, how we live as a good Buddhist. That is how we keep our precepts.
Anyway, there are some rules, and some reason why each person exists here. There is some reason why a plant is a plant and a star is a star. So when you say Dharma, Dharma includes everything. Dharma is another name of the Buddha, the absolute one.
The third one is Sangha precept. "Sangha" means to be harmonious. Buddha and the law of the universe are not two. When Buddha and the law of the universe are not two, and when someone who is practicing zazen, Buddha and his law are one, that is complete harmony. It is more than harmony – it is actually one. So, we say the precepts cannot be divided into three, but we can explain it in three ways. My practice, my zazen itself, is the precepts. That is one interpretation, one way of understanding the precepts.
There are rules you know. If I do something good, the result will be good. You cannot escape from the law of karma. If you understand it in that way, then that rule, or that law, includes everything. We say, "the law of karma." You cannot escape from karma. Nothing can escape from karma. There is always some rule. The rule is how everything exists, so it is the same thing as Buddha himself. When we say "Buddha," Buddha acts with karma, by karma, or for karma. So karma and Buddha are the same. And I, as Buddha’s disciple, am always one with Buddha. We cannot escape from it, so we call it the indivisible precept. We cannot divide it into three.
Now you are listening to my lecture, and you may study many Buddhistbooks. The books you read are not Buddhism itself, but an explan-ation of this truth. "Form is emptiness, emptiness is form." If we explain it like this, it is the study of the Prajna Paramita group of sutras. If we put emphasis on how to be Buddha, or why we are Buddha, then that is the study of the Lotus Sutra.
What you study by doing koans is the relationship between our practice and reality. We have a glance at truth, or enlightenment, or Buddha, which is always one, which is not divisible, and which cannot be explained in words. Through koan practice, you will have a glance at the truth, "Oh, this is reality!" That is koan practice. Whatever you say, whatever you write, it is one of the ways to put reality into words. If you are an artist, what you work on is how to convey your understanding of the truth.
The study of Buddhism, of course, is included in our study of precepts. To observe the precepts is not just observing ten prohibitory precepts, "do not kill," "do not steal," etc. Those are precepts, but, even though you observe the ten precepts completely, that is not how you observe our real precepts. So we are not interested in explaining the two hundred and fifty, or more, precepts....Anyway, the point is not to observe those precepts one after another. The point is how to be yourself... Then you have the precepts.... So the best way is just to be you yourself, then the precepts are with you always.
People may ask, "What are you doing at Zen Center?" "What kind of practice do you have at Zen Center?" There may be many ways, but, in short, to be oneself is the purpose of our practice. How to be oneself, and how to keep the precepts, Buddha’s precepts, is our point of practice. Those are the three indivisible precepts: Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha.
The next one – I’m not continuing my lecture anymore (laughs) because you may get hungry if I continue. The other three are the Three Collective Pure Precepts – collection of all the goodies. Those are another three precepts. How about it? "Collection of all the goodies precepts," (laughs) and we have ten more. Those are the Ten Prohibitory Precepts. Altogether, there are sixteen precepts, and we tentatively explain the framework of Buddhism by the explanation of the precepts. So the precepts are not just rules. They are a direct explanation of our life and Buddha’s teaching and zazen practice. That is why it is important for you to receive the precepts.
Thank you very much.
How to Observe the Precepts
This morning I want to talk about Zen, Zen precepts. As you know, the real meaning of precepts is not just rules, but is rather our way of life. When we organize our life, you see something like rules – even though you are not intending to observe some particular rule, the rules are always there. As soon as you get up, in order to wake up completely, you wash your face. That is a precept, one of the precepts. And at a certain time you eat breakfast, when you become hungry; that is, you are observing some rules when you eat breakfast at some certain time. It is actually the way of life you follow naturally. So if you practice zazen there will be rules in your practice. So, at the same time, zazen practice is precepts, one of the precepts and all of the precepts. If you really understand how Buddhists come to the idea of precepts you will understand the relationship between Zen and the precepts. Precepts are just our way of life.
As a Zen student we put emphasis on our everyday practice, including zazen practice. And when you think about how to cope with the problems you have in your everyday life, you will realize how important it is to practice zazen. Only the power of practice will help you in a true sense.
For instance, when you hit the mokugyo, or wooden drum, if you try to control the chanting, if you think, "This is too fast, so I must make the chanting slower," or "Oh, this is too slow, I must make it a little bit faster," if you try to do it by way of your hand or your mind, it doesn’t work. Only when you do it from your hara* by the feeling you have in your zazen practice, can you do it. Just by your mind or your hand, you cannot do anything. It does not work. The students will not follow your mokugyo. Only when you do it with your zazen power can you control it. When you can control yourself very well without having any idea of controlling anything; when you set the right pace, then you can control yourself. And when you can control yourself just as you sit in zazen posture, then you can control the chanting perfectly. This is also true with your everyday practice.When you do something just through your skill or just by your mind, you will not be supported by people and so you will not help others. Only when you do it with zazen mind can you help others, and you will be naturally supported by the people. So if the precepts are just some moral code which you have in your mind, those precepts will not work at all. When you forget all the precepts and, without trying to, observe them in the same way as you eat when you are hungry, then naturally precepts are there. When you forget all about precepts and when you can observe them quite naturally, that is how you keep the precepts, precepts are there.
In your zazen practice you just sit. You have no idea of attaining anything. You just sit. What do we mean by just sit? When we just sit we already include everything and we are not simply a part of this cosmic being – we are one with everything. This is just an explanation, but the feeling is that you include everything, and actually this is not true just for zazen. When you drink a cup of tea, that activity includes everything. Actually it is so. When you say this is tea, and this is me, it does not include everything – you are here and tea is there. This is just tea and it does not include everything. But when you drink it without any idea of tasting what it is, being completely one with the tea, then you have no idea of tea and no idea of you. This activity includes everything. So, as Dogen Zenji said, if your everyday activity does not include everything, it is not Buddhist activity. It seems almost impossible to feel that way, but actually if you realize, if you experience what is zazen practice, then you will understand what is our everyday life and how everyday life should be for yourself, for others, and for each activity. You will realize that each activity should be zazen.
The words of the famous Zen Master Ummon are often used as koans, and are very well known for their subtlety. The point of his words is difficult to explain, the only way to understand his words is through practice. It is almost impossible to understand through words, but he tried to express it in Zen mondo, question and answer, in various ways. Later Zen Masters said Ummon’s words are like a cup and its lid which fit perfectly. Or, we can say, follow the wave and drive the wave. Do you understand? The boat follows the wave and drives the way like the mokugyofollows the chanting and drives the chanting. If you just follow the chanting, the mokugyo will get slower and slower; still, unless you listen you will lose control. So you have to listen and at the same time you should lead, you should drive the chanting. It is not just to follow the chanting, you should drive the chanting too. Following the chanting and driving the chanting. How do you do it? If you asked Ummon how you do it, he may say, "What are you thinking about?" He may say, "Just sit."
How can I make the perfect cover for this cup? The only way is to make a lid and cover it. But if you think too much about it and if you work on it too much, the lid will become smaller and smaller and it will not fit. If you do not observe the cup, it may be too big. Observing the cup and making the cup, that is the way and that is how you practice zazen. That is the power of practice.
So to know the center of things, or to have a whole picture of things or events, is the point of practice. And how you do it is to find, to know the center of yourself. When you know where your center is in zazen, that is the center of yourself and everything. When you do not lose your center wherever you are, it means that you are boss. But, if you lose your center you are already mixed up and, even though you insist yourself, you are not in the center.
How you keep the precepts is how you organize your life. And how you organize your life is how we practice zazen. This point can be explained in various ways. When we practice zazen there is nothing outside of us – everything, whole being, is included in our practice. So the merit of practice is just for you, yourself, because there is just one whole being. There is no you and no objective world. Objective world and subjective world are one and the same in our practice.
We explain it in this way, but that is just an explanation of our zazen practice. When you just sit without being involved in the thinking mind or emotional activity, when you just remain on your black cushion, then that is the practice we mean which is explained in various ways. So as Bodhidharma said "no merit." What will be the merit of practice? "No merit." Because there is nothing but practice, there is no merit to give to anyone or to have for yourself. Merit itself is zazen. Zazen itself is merit. So no merit, just zazen. If you say merit, there is no zazen. So he said "no merit." Whatever you do there is no merit. If there is merit, that is dualistic practice. If you observe precepts in that way, that is heresy. If you think "I have to observe the ten precepts, one by one," that is wrong practice.
For a long time, many Buddhists tried to observe our precepts with great effort. But that kind of practice violates the precepts because observed in that way, precepts become dualistic, something outside ourselves. "I have to observe the precepts!" That is not the way we practice zazen. For Mahayana Buddhists dualistic practice is a violation of practice. Why is it? Because when we observe rigidly, or when we are caught by precepts, what will happen? This may also be a violation of the precepts.
There are precepts, but you know, precepts should be observed without any idea of observing. That is how to practice, how to observe the precepts. In short, when you observe precepts in the same way as you practice zazen, that is perfectly transmitted precepts from Buddha to us. So as Mahayana Buddhists, whether or not we know each of the sixteen precepts or the two hundred and fifty precepts, we should still be able to observe precepts. And when we practice zazen, we should not practice in such a way that w think "this is just zazen." This zazen includes all the various studies of Buddhism.
This morning when I joined you I felt a deep feeling. I think that is because you were sitting just before you came to lecture. This kind of feeling is important. This is real sangha. With this feeling I think we can carry on our practice and our life in this zendo and in this building.
Thank you very much.
The Manifested Three Treasures, Part 1
Today I will explain Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. Originally, Buddha is the one who attained enlightenment under the Bodhi Tree and became a teacher of all [Buddhist] teachers. Dharma is the teaching which was spoken by Buddha, and Sangha is the group who studied under Buddha. This way of understanding Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha is called the Manifested Three Treasures, or as we say in Japanese, Genzen Sambo. Genzen means to appear. Of course, whether Buddha appeared or not, there is Truth. But if there is no one who realizes the truth, the truth means nothing to us. So in this sense we say the manifestation of truth, and the manifestation of truth is Sangha.
People who join the practice with harmony and unity are called Sangha. The meaning of Sangha is not only this group of people, but also the state of harmony or unity. Truth itself is Dharma, and the truth which is not divided into various forms is called Buddha, which is another interpretation of the Three Treasures. This understanding is called "one body/three treasures." Although there are three treasures, they are an interpretation of the one reality. So we call this kind of interpretation, "one body/three treasures" or ittai sambo. Ittai: ichi is one and itai is body; sambo is three treasures. Ittai sambo.But within the social framework of culture we have Buddhist culture. That culture consists of Buddha and his teaching, and the priests [monks] or followers of Buddhism. So, this understanding of the Three Treasures in Japanese is called juji sambo. Juji actually means cultural sambo. Existing sambo is what exists in society or within a cultural framework. So, beautiful buildings and Buddhist art or Buddha’s image are, perhaps, Buddha. Scriptures written in a beautiful design and literature are Dharma. Priests [monks] in robes are maybe sangha.
The cultural Three Treasures are closely related to society. The Buddhist organization is also Sangha. So there are three ways of understanding the Three Treasures, but actually the three are not different. It is one and it is three. This is a very old way of oriental thinking, even before Buddha. Buddha applied this interpretation to our framework of teaching. I think Christianity has the idea of Trinity. This is the universal framework of religion. But in Buddhism there are many sects, so Buddhism does not combine many ways of understanding in one school.
Each school is based on some particular understanding or standpoint. We do not take many standpoints in one school. We especially emphasize this in Japan, but this is not sectarianism. Once we take a standpoint, we should develop that standpoint through and through until we can understand various standpoints. At first, each way of understanding has its own insight. But if your understanding becomes deeper and deeper, you can understand other viewpoints at the same time. This is how we establish various schools in Buddhism.
The Nichiren school takes the standpoint of Dharma. Dharma includes the other two, Buddha and Sangha. Their object of worship is the Lotus Sutra, and they repeat, nam myo ho renge kyo. "Myo ho ren ge kyo" is the title of the Lotus Sutra in Japanese. The Shin School repeats Amida Buddha’s name, Namu Amida Butsu. The Zen school repeats Buddha’s name, but the emphasis is on Sangha. The Zen school is not so concerned about the intellectual viewpoint or understanding. So we just repeat the founder’s name and say, Namu Shakyamuni Butsu. When we say Namu Shakyamuni Butsu, his scripture is included and his Sangha is also included; and we are a part of the Sangha. Even though we members of the Sangha are not direct disciples of Buddha, we are the descendants of Buddha. We are successors of Buddha; and because we emphasize the practice of attaining enlightenment as Buddha did, we naturally put emphasis also on Sangha. Through practice we build our character as Buddha did and that’s why we repeat Shakyamuni Buddha’s name. For us it is natural to repeat Shakyamuni Buddha’s name rather than Amida Buddha’s name or the name of a scripture. If you repeat the name of some scripture, you are liable to be bound by some teaching which was told by Buddha. Actually, it’s impossible to authorize some teaching as the absolute teaching because something which is told by some particular person could not be absolute, even though it was told by Buddha. It may be impossible to authorize the teaching for human beings.
You may say if it’s impossible to authorize even the teaching of Buddha, then how is it possible to authorize some person as a Buddha (laughs). This is the point we are studying. This is why we emphasize our practice, and we have a particular understanding of practice called practice based on original enlightenment. It may look like quite an unusual way to authorize Buddha’s Sangha, but this is more adequate and understandable. So Soto Zen emphasizes transmission from Buddha to us, and we emphasize Sangha or those who have transmission and who are disciples of Buddha.
Up to now I have talked about the three ways of understanding the Three Treasures. The first is the Manifested Three Treasures. The next is One Body Three Treasures, or a philosophical under-standing of the oneness of the Three Treasures. It is necessary to be concentrated on one thing. If we have three objects of worship, it is difficult to be concentrated; so we have to have some philosophical or intellectual understanding. But, in fact, what exists here is the actual activity of Buddha. Therefore we emphasize the Sangha.
The third way of understanding the Three Treasures is understanding our daily activity. This is the traditional Three Treasures or Cultural Three Treasures. But the Cultural Three Treasures are supported by philosophy and Buddha’s teaching and Buddha’s character, and the Cultural Three Treasures cannot be separated from the other two. When understanding the Three Treasures, each way will complement the other two and make our understanding complete. This is the Soto way of understanding the Three Treasures. We have the Three Treasures and what we do is practice zazen; that is our way. So, our understanding of practice is very different from that of other schools.
Each school has its own particular understanding of the Three Treasures. If you study each school’s understanding of the Three Treasures, you will have perfect understanding. And you will find that even though there are many schools, what each one actually means is the same. It must be so because religious life is the expression of our inmost nature which is universal to everyone. As Buddha attained enlightenment, we will attain enlightenment. What Buddha was striving for is the same thing we are striving for because we have the same inmost nature as a human being.
When you project your inmost nature into the objective world as Buddha, Dharma or Sangha, it is nothing but our inmost desire to be someone whom you can accept. You strive for something acceptable in its true sense. It is the same thing. You create God, and you strive for God. It means you are striving for yourself. And as we have the same human nature, our understanding of it must be the same. But if the standpoint is different, the way of explanation should be different, that’s all.
Tentatively, I am giving you an explanation of the Three Treasures. It may be necessary to explain it more, but as we have no time, I will explain the next paragraph.
We should revere the Three Treasures and make offerings to them. Veneration of the Buddha, the Law or Truth, and the Sangha is in accordance with a precept handed down by Buddha in India to the ancestors of China. These are the most important precepts handed down from Buddha to us. We should not worship a Genie of the mountains, or call upon the spirit of death for any reason whatsoever, nor should we pay homage to any heretical religion or religious edifice. Such worship does not lead to emancipation. The Three Treasures are not just an idea invented by someone. They are the universal framework of all the advanced religions, not just the framework of the Buddhist religion. But some hasty person, who usually does not pay any attention to religion, finding himself in some difficulty, may worship something like the god of fire, or god of water or some powerful natural spirit without any idea of what the teaching is, what God is, or true practice.
It is quite easy to know our inmost nature if it is related to the right way. And if we express that inmost nature in an appropriate way, it will develop. But if our inmost nature is misled by a hasty idea, a person may go astray and even destroy himself. This is why Buddha said that you should not worship the Genie of the mountains or call upon the spirit of death for any reason whatsoever. This is too simple.
Nor should we pay homage to any heretical...here it says heretical, but heretical is not an adequate translation. I don’t know if you have an appro-priate word for this. We say gedo. Gedo is "outer way" which is just a classification. We call Buddhist scripture "inner scripture," and other, non-Buddhist literature "outer." Whether inner or outer, it is the same thing; inside and outside. Outside does not mean bad, and inside is not always good. So, as Buddhists, we should not take absolute refuge in outer religious scriptures or organizations. It is not because they are bad, but because we should not mix up our viewpoint. If you try to discover something good, like a monkey in a cage, you will not find out anything. All you will find is radishes. And your stomach will be hurt (laugh). That is not our way. We should make some human effort always. That is why he says we should not pay homage to outer religious edifices. Such worship does not lead to emancipation. If we have only an idea of the Three Treasures, the Three Treasures will be the goal. If you just have an idea of God without a teaching of the way to God, you will be lost. You will be discouraged. If there is a God, there should be a way to God. But God is the absolute one. So it is a perpetual idea we have which cannot be attained. This point should be understood by people.
It is necessary to have some way to enjoy Buddhahood. Someone who enjoys or rejoices in Buddha nature is the perfect one, or Buddha. This kind of framework is very important. And there must be some practice. There must be some understanding of life. For us, our everyday life is practice itself. So in our everyday life we have religion, if you understand Buddhism. Of course, you will reach Buddhahood through your activity in everyday life. But if you worship some god just because of fear, in what way can you appeal to your inmost request? You will be lost. You will not be led to emancipation.
Before Buddhism became popular in Japan, Prince Shotaku set up our Constitution for the Japanese people. In the second chapter he said, "Respect the Three Treasures." He said that to follow the Three Treasures is the supreme way of attaining liberation for everyone. Because we use the termi-nology of Buddhism, it looks like what we are talking about is just Buddhism, but it is not actually so. That is why he said that if you worship some immature religion you will not attain enlightenment. To take refuge in the Triple Treasure it is necessary to have a pure faith. Whether it be at the time of the Tathagata or after his disappearance from the world, we should repeat his formula with clasped hands and bowed head, "I take refuge in the Buddha. I take refuge in the Dharma. I take refuge in the Sangha."
Pure faith includes our mental, physical and verbal effort. It is not enough to just think something or say something superficial. Pure faith means, not just faith in something, but real action – reality, realized action. This is necessary to have real practice. You should take refuge in the Triple Treasure with real effort, not false effort. And it doesn’t matter whether it is in the time of the Buddha Tathagata or not. In Zen Master Dogen’s time, almost everyone believed in the Three Periods of Buddhism. They said that in the last period people will not believe in Buddha and Buddhism will fade away into some other religion. But Dogen did not believe this. He believed that there is no difference in our practice, whether Buddha is here or not.
We take refuge in the Buddha because he is the great teacher. We take refuge in the Law because it is our medicine and points the way. We take refuge in the Sangha because the members are our wise friends. Although the Three Treasures are one, the understanding, or the way they help us is different. It is through this triple adoration that we become the disciples of Buddha. Without the Triple Treasure, or if one of them is missing, we cannot be a disciple of the Buddha. It is on the basis of this adoration that all the moral precepts of Buddhism rest.
We say "adoration," but just to adore Buddha is like a dream. It means nothing. So adoration should follow some actual practice or guidance. Without guidance, God means nothing. Even though you believe in a God, it will not help you if your everyday life is cut off from God. In that way God means nothing. So all the great religions have their teachings and followers. And where there are followers, there should be a way to attain enlightenment – not in the next life, but in this moment. This is Buddhism.
Sincere Practice and Way Seeking Mind
To take refuge in the Triple Treasure it is necessary to have pure faith, whether it be in the time of the Tathagata or after his disappearance from the world. We should repeat this formula with clasped hands and bowed head. D.T. Suzuki’s translation is, "I take refuge in the Buddha, the incomparable honored one. I take refuge in the Dharma, honorable for its purity. I take refuge in the Sangha, honorable for its harmonious life. I have finished taking refuge in the Buddha. I have finished taking refuge in the Dharma. I have finished taking refuge in the Sangha."
In Japanese it is simpler: namu kie Butsu, namu kie Ho, namu kie So. Kie Butsu myo sam, kie Ho rijin sam, kie So wago som; kie bu kyo, kie Ho kyo, kie So kyo. But if we translate it into English, we cannot arrange the words in this way. Whether in English or Japanese, we have to repeat those precepts. Buddha is said to be the supreme world honored one. There are many names for him. We have ten names for Buddha. By Buddha we do not mean just Shakyamuni Buddha. At the same time we mean various Buddhas. So sometimes we say the Buddhas in the three periods of time: past, future and pres-ent. Namu sanze sho Butsu, we say: I take refuge in all Buddhas in the three worlds, Namu is to take refuge. Sanze means the three worlds. Shobutsu means all the Buddhas, or we say, "Ji ho san shi i shi hu." Ji homeans ten directions. San shi means three worlds. I shi means all. Hu means Buddha. Ji ho san shi i shi hu, shi son bu sa mo ko sa means: Shi san is the supreme one, bu sa is Bosatsu, that’s bodhisattva. Mo ko sa is great Bodhisattvas. That is actually Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. Dharma is mo ko ho ja ho ro mi. Moko is maha or moka: great. Ho ja ho ro mi is Prajna Paramita. That is the teaching. So when we say ji ho san shi i shi hu, shi son bu sa mo ko sa, mo ko ho ja ho ro mi, that means that we are taking refuge in Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha. That is why we say: Ji ho san shi i shi hu. That is the old Chinese pronunciation, but the meaning is the same.The Buddha is supposed to be the Supreme One. The Dharma is called Dharma because it is Truth itself. It is impersonal so it is pure. There is no dust on it (laughing). If there is any dust on the law, you will be put in jail, rules or Dharma should always be clean. So Dharma is something which is honored for its purity. I take refuge in the Sangha which is honored for its harmonious life.
You know, we human beings should be always harmonious and we should work in unity. So we call a Buddhist group "harmonious Sangha." Sangha means Sang or so gya in Japanese. So means priest and ga is plural; so sanghameans priest group, or group of followers.
Here he says, "We take refuge in the Buddha because he is the great teacher." "We take refuge in the Law because it is our medicine and points the way." It is law or rule. "We take refuge in the priesthood because its members are our wise friends." It is through this triple adoration that we become disciples of Buddha. We should respect the Three Treasures before we receive any further precepts. This is the fundamental precept, since it is on the basis of this devotion that all the moral precepts of Buddhism rest, from beginning to end. Buddhism starts from these three refuges and ends with these three refuges.
"A responsive communication between the refugee and the preceptor makes the maturity of the merit of the triple refuges." "Responsive communication" is the translation of kanno doko. This is a very difficult word to translate. Kanno means to respond to each other. And Doko means true relationship. Do is Tao. Ko is interrelationship. Here we say Kanno Doko. In terms of consciousness it happens in this way to us: we feel some coherence, or interrelationship, or correspon-dence between Buddha and us. But, originally, there is no difference between Buddha nature and human nature. So this is more than responsive communication or relationship. But it happens in this way, so "a responsive communion between the refugee and the preceptor," or "protector" (not "protector," ok, maybe "Buddha") "marks the maturity of the merit of the Triple Treasure."
When we become one with Buddha, it means the Triple Treasure, or refuge, is completed. So, to take refuge in Buddha means to become one with Buddha or to find our true nature which is not different from Buddha. "Be he a devil or man, dwelling in the lower regions, demon or animal; whoever experiences the responsive communion is sure to take refuge in the Triple Treasure." By nature, everything has Buddha nature. So when beings have this experience, they can attain the perfection and they can take the Triple Treasure. "The merit of having taken the Three Refuges continually increases through the various stages of existence and ultimately calls forth the highest right universal enlightenment." "Highest right universal enlightenment" is Buddhahood. If you repeat this experience, you will attain the highest Buddhahood. "This excellent and inconceivably deep merit has been proved by the Tathagata himself; therefore, all living beings should take this refuge."
Buddha himself experienced it and Buddha has the same nature that we have. This means it is possible to have the same experience.
This is not some particular experience when we realize our true nature or some occasion. So here we emphasize the universality of the Three Refuges. Here he just emphasizes the precepts, but precepts and Zen are not different. Both Zen and precepts are the expression of our true nature; the experience of finding or realizing our true nature. In this sense there is no difference. So the way to practice Zen is the way we take refuge in the precepts.
So, by mutual communion, or kanno doko, we mean the true experience of Zen. It is not some ecstasy or some mysterious state of mind, but it is a deep joy that is even more than joy. You may have this true experience through some change in your mental state. But a change of mental state is not, strictly speaking, enlightenment. Enlightenment is more than that. That comes with it, but it is more than that. What we experience is joy or mysterious experience, but something follows. That something which follows, besides this experience, is true enlightenment. So we should not suppose that enlightenment will always be experienced in terms of consciousness. Even though you don’t know, you know that enlightenment is there. And by repeating various activities with this subtle caution, the experience becomes deeper and your consciousness will become more and more mature and smooth. So you may say that enlightenment is the maturity of your experience of everyday life. When enlightenment does not follow, your experience is black and white. But when true experience follows your conscious activity or conscious experience, the way you accept it is more natural, smooth, and deep.
It is not just joy. It is something more than joy. It may not be possible to experience enlightenment just in terms of consciousness. But what you do experience is much deeper. This point should always be remembered. If you remember this point, all the precepts are there. You will not be attached to some particular experience; you will not be caught by the dualistic experience of good or bad, or myself or others. When we violate the precepts, we attach to some particular experience.
When you have something, you will have some joy of possession. To do that is, you know, to break the precept of not stealing, (laughs) or not being greedy about giving either spiritual or material help to others. So when those three precepts are kept in the right way, all the precepts will be kept. In short, when you do everything as you do zazen, then all the precepts will be there. We say that we have to just sit. Our mind is clear. You have no experience whatsoever. Maybe the only experience you will have is sleepiness or pain in your legs (laughs). No particular experience.
But when you attain enlightenment, when some sudden change of mental state comes to you – happens to you – even that experience is not true enlightenment. You will see something, or realize something in terms of consciousness, but that means you saw something, that’s all. It may not be yours. You saw something there, something beautiful. That is the experience, that’s all. It is a true experience, but that is not enough. We should obtain the truth. We should become one with the truth. That is taking refuge in Buddha or Truth. When we become one with it, there is no communion or interrelationship because it is just one. That is completely taking refuge in its true sense. That is the experience we have in our practice.
Namu in Japanese means "to plunge into something." We say, "you cannot skim over the water in a basket." But if you dip the basket in it, the basket will be full of water. That is the way. As long as you are making (laughter) a dualistic effort, you cannot do anything because you are a basket. You are full of holes. Holes are you. We say, mu ro chi. Mu ro chi means "no-hole wisdom." (laughter) Our wisdom is hole wisdom. Wisdom with holes. Mu ro chimeans "no-holes wisdom." But for us, no holes wisdom is just dipping a basket in the water. Then there is no hole. (laughter) That is taking refuge, and that is how we practice zazen. This is the interpretation of precepts and the understanding of our zazen.
Thank you very much.Right Effort in Practice
"All the difficulties you have in zazen should not take place outside your mind. Your efforts should be kept within your mind. In other words you have to accept the difficulty as not being other than what you are."
Most of you are beginners, so it may be rather difficult for you to understand why we practice zazen or meditation in this way. We always say "just-to-sit." And if you do, you will find out that Zen practice, or just-to-sit, is not easy. Just-to-sit may be the most difficult thing. To work on something is not difficult; how to not work on anything is rather difficult. When we have the idea of "self," we want some reason why we work on something. But if you do not have the idea of self, you can remain silent and calm whether or not you work on something. You will not lose your composure. So to remain silent and calm is a kind of test we receive. If you can do it, it means you have no idea of self. If your life is based on the usual idea of self, what you will do will not be successful in its true sense. There will be success in one way, but in another you are digging your own grave. So to work without the idea of self, is a very, very important point. It is much more important than making a good decision. Even a good decision based on a one-sided idea of self will create difficulties for yourself and others.For students of Zen, to work on something or to help others is to do things with our single mind. Our effort is concentrated within ourselves. This is the activity of our essence of mind, according to the Sixth Patriarch who said that in the realm of our essence of mind, we do not do things outside of mind. All that we do is the activity of our essence of mind which is not dualistic. By essence of mind he means Big Mind and not the selfish mind. Of course, there is dualistic activity, but it takes place within Big Mind. This kind of single-minded activity is distinguished from ordinary dualistic activity.
When you practice zazen, you will of course have physical pain in your legs and mentally you will have some difficulty. You will find it difficult to be concentrated on your breathing. One after another images will come into your mind. Or your mind will go out for a walk and wander about. I have many difficulties in my practice, so I think you, too, will find it very difficult to sit in good zazen.
All the difficulties you have in zazen should not take place outside your mind. Your efforts should be kept within your mind. In other words you have to accept the difficulty as not being other than what you are. You should not try to make some tentative particular effort based on your small mind like, "my practice should be better." "My practice" you say, but zazen is not your practice, it is buddha’s practice. Your effort is based on Big Mind which cannot get out of. If your small self begins to act without the care of Big Mind, that is not Zen. What you do should be well taken care of by Big Mind. Our practice should be based on mind or original way-seeking mind which works on and on continuously.
The secret of practice is also true in observation of Buddhist precepts. The dualistic idea of whether to observe or not observe the precepts takes place within your mind when you practice Zen. There are no precepts to break and there is no one who is violating the precepts. To make up your mind to make the very best effort to observe the precepts constantly, forever, whether your effort is complete or not, is Buddha’s – Buddha-Mind’s effort. But if you put yourself outside the precepts or outside Buddha-Mind then there is no time to observe them completely. If your activity is involved in Buddha’s activity, whatever you do is Buddha’s effort. The even if it is not perfect, you are manifesting Buddha’s mercy and activity.
Dogen Zenji was enlightened when he heard his master strike and say to the disciple sitting next to Dogen, "What are you doing? You have to make a hard effort. What are you doing?" That effort is Zen. That effort is to observe the precepts. If we make our best effort on each moment with confidence, that is enlightenment. When you ask whether your way is perfect or not, there is an insidious idea of self. When you do your best to observe the precepts, to practice Zen, within the Big Mind then there is enlightenment. There is no special way to attain enlightenment. Enlightenment is not some certain stage. Enlightenment is everywhere. Wherever you are, enlightenment is there. Whatever you do with your best effort, enlightenment follows. This is very important for our Zen practice and for our everyday life. We should make our best effort in our everyday life as well as in practice of Zen.
In order to have this kind of practice in everyday life, you want your friend, you want your master, you want the precepts we have. Some form is necessary because it is not possible to be concentrated on an uncertain way. There must be strict rules to observe. Because of the rules, of the way of sitting, of the way of practice, it is possible to be concentrated. It is the same thing in your everyday life. Without purpose or aim you cannot organize your life.
My master Ian Kishizawa Roshi used to say that we had to have a vow or an aim to accomplish. The aim we have may not be prefect in its strict sense, but even so it is necessary for us to have it. It is like the precepts. Even though it is almost impossible to observe them, we must have them. Without an aim in our life and the precepts, we cannot be a good Buddhist, we cannot actualize our way.
We should be very grateful to the rigid formal way of practicing Zen and Zen precepts. You may think these precepts are useless if we cannot observe them perfectly. But they are the traces of human efforts based on the great mercy of Buddha. The life we have now is the result of such useless effort. From one-celled animals to monkeys. I do not know how long, but we wasted much time, many efforts until we came to this human life. The giant redwood trees of Muir Woods have annual rings or layers and we have these annual layers in our human life too, I think. That is precepts in its wide sense. You say we don’t want them, but you have them. As long as you do, you should sit, and thus you have to know how to continue your effort to have another annual ring. In this way we will develop Buddhism more and more, forever.
Strictly speaking we must have more precepts in America. You think two-hundred and fifty precepts for men and five hundred for women is awful and that it should be made simpler. But I think you have to add some more to the precepts we have in Japan. Actually, I think you will have more difficulty in practicing zazen in America than we do in Japan. This kind of difficulty should be continued forever or we will not have peace in our world. Without the precepts there can be no congenial life for human beings. By reflecting on our human life and by respecting the precepts and rules of humanity, we will know the direction in which to make effort and we will have the right orientation in our life. This is how we practice Zen and how Buddhism has been developed.Zazen, Rituals & Precepts Cannot Be Separated
I want to talk with you about some problems you may have when you come to Zen Center. I think you understand pretty well why we practice. Why we observe rituals is perhaps more difficult to understand. If you ask me why I observe rituals, it is difficult to answer.
First, I do it because I have been doing it for a long time so there is no problem. I tend to think that because I have no problem in observing my way, then you must not have a problem [laughs]. But you are Americans, and I am Japanese, and you have not been practicing the Buddhist way for so long, therefore there must be various problems [laughs].
These problems are almost impossible to solve. But if you actually follow our way I think you will have some understanding of our rituals. What I want to talk about is the precepts.
Precepts for me includes rituals. And when we say "precepts," it is another name for our zazen practice. For us, zazen practice and observation of rituals are not two different things. How to observe the rituals is how to observe the precepts. Our practice, especially in the Soto school, puts emphasis on everyday life, including rituals, eating, and going to the restroom. All those things are included in our practice.So the way we practice zazen, the way we practice rituals, and the way of life of a Buddhist or Zen student is all fundamentally the same. But when we talk about our way of life or rituals, we come face to face with some rules. The rules of observing ceremonies are rituals, and the rules of our everyday life are our precepts. When we say "precepts," we usually mean some rules, but that is just a superficial understanding of precepts. Precepts are actually the expression of our true nature. The way we express our true nature is always according to the place or situation in which you live. So to practice zazen is to be yourself and to observe our precepts is just to be yourself.
As you have some way of sitting on a black cushion, we have some way of observing our rituals or ceremony in the Buddha Hall. The point of our zazen practice is to be free from thinking mind and from emotional activity. In short, that is the practice of selflessness. In our observation of rituals, the point is to be free from selfish ideas. The practice of rituals is the practice of selflessness.
First you enter the room and you bow. In Japanese we say gotai tochi. Gotai is "our body." Tochi is "to throw away." It means to throw away our physical and mental being—in short, to practice selflessness. We offer ourselves to Buddha. That is the practice of bowing. When you bow [to the floor], you lift your hands. We lift Buddha’s feet, which are on your palms and you feel Buddha on your palms. So when you practice bowing, you have no idea of self. You give up everything.
When Buddha was begging, his follower spread his hair on the muddy ground and let Buddha walk over it. That is supposed to be the origin of why we bow. In ritual, you bow and work. You begin everything by some signal. That kind of thing you may not like so much [laughs]. It looks very formal, to begin everything by the sound of a bell. Whether you want to do it or not, you must do it. It looks very formal. As long as you are in the Buddha Hall, you should observe our way according to the rules we have there. We do it to forget ourselves and to become one. To be a Zen student in this Buddha Hall is why we observe our rituals.
This is a very important point. To feel your being, here, in this moment, is a very important practice. That is the point of observing precepts and observing rituals and practicing zazen. To feel or to be yourself at a certain time, in a certain place. That is why we practice our way.
So the actual feeling of rituals cannot be understood without observing them. When you observe them, you have the actual feeling of rituals. As long as you try to know what it means or why you do it, it is difficult to feel your actual being in this place. Only when you do it will you feel your being. To be a Buddhist is to do things like Buddha. That is actually how to be a Buddhist. It does not mean that when you are able to observe our rituals as your friends do, that you will have no problem in your everyday life. This ritual feeling, or practice, will extend into your everyday life.
You will find yourself in various situations, and you will intuitively know what you should do. You will have the right response to someone’s activity. When you are not able to respond to another without wondering what he has on his mind, you will force something. Most of the time I don’t think you will give the most intuitive response.
I want you to do rituals until you are quite sure about your response to other people. How one responds to others is very important. When we teachers observe our students, they may be trying to act right, and trying to understand people, but most of the time it is rather difficult for them to have some kind of intuition. If you start to have this kind of intuition, you will have big confidence in yourself, and you will trust people, and you will trust yourself. And so, all the problems which you created for yourself will be no more. You will have no more problem. That is why we have training or practice.
My master, Gyokujun So-on, used to say, "Stay with me for several years. If you become a priest, you will be a good priest, and if you remain a layman, you will be a good layman or good citizen, and you will have no problem in your life."
I think that was very true. I was the sixth and youngest disciple when I became my master’s disciple. Two of us became priests, the rest of the disciples remained laymen. They are very good actually. When they came to my teacher [laughs], they had some trouble. Except for one disciple who passed away, the rest of them have done pretty well, although they are not priests. So I think what he said is very true.
This is very good practice for you. You may think our practice is like army practice [laughs], but actually it is not so. The idea is quite different. I think the Japanese army copied our practice. It looks like it, but they couldn’t copy our spirit.
You should trust your innate nature, your buddha-nature. That is the most important point. If you trust your true nature, you should be able to trust your teacher, too. That is very important. Not because your teacher is perfect, but because his innate nature is the same as yours. The point of practice between teacher and disciple is to get rid of selfish ideas as much as possible and to trust each other. Only when you trust your teacher can you practice zazen, can you practice rituals, and can you act as a Zen Center student.
To remain always a Zen Center student is a very important point. You become a Zen Center student by trusting your true nature, and trusting your teacher, and trusting your zazen practice without saying why [laughs]. I think you should do it, as long as you come here. And if you don’t want to do so, I think you shouldn’t come here. As long as you come here, you should follow our way, or else maybe you will waste your time and you will regret it.
So in this way, we can carry on our schedule. The way we carry on our schedule is the way we observe our precepts. Precepts were initiated by Buddha when he said, "Don’t do this, or don’t behave like that." That was the origin of precepts. In India, in Buddha’s time, there were Buddha’s precepts. And in China, they have precepts which are based on the Chinese way of life. We have sixteen precepts, and these precepts are the essential precepts which we should observe as a Japanese, as an American, or as an Indian priest or layman.
These precepts are the precepts which you can apply to your everyday life. We say, "Don’t kill," but "don’t kill" does not just mean don’t kill flies or insects. Actually, it is too late. If you say, "Here is a fly, should I kill it or not?" it is too late! Before we see the fly, we have this kind of problem. When we eat, we say, "Seventy-two labors brought us this rice." When we say "seventy-two labors" this includes protecting grains from various insects. It is not just—not to kill insects. When you eat, and you chant, "Seventy-two labors brought us this rice," it includes already the precept of "not to kill." After making a great effort to protect the corn from insects, we can eat. When you chant, "seventy-two labors," you should be relating to the precept "not to kill." So "not to kill," is not any special precept.
To exist here in this way is the result of sacrificing many animals and plants. You are always sacrificing something. So as long as you are involved in dualistic concepts, it is not possible for you to observe our precepts. So how to get out of dualistic concepts and fill our being with gratitude is the point of practice. Actually it is very foolish to say "not to kill." But the reason we say "not to kill" is to point out or to understand our life from various angles. Not to kill, not to steal, not to speak ill of others. Each of these precepts includes the other precepts. And each practice or ritual we observe includes the others. So if you have the actual feeling of being here, that is the way to observe precepts and the way to practice zazen.
If you understand how you observe even one precept, you can observe the rest of the precepts and you can practice zazen, you can observe rituals. Zazen practice and observation of rituals or precepts cannot be separated. How to experience this kind of feeling is how you understand our precepts.
If you say it is difficult, it may be very difficult. But it will not be so difficult a thing if you say, "I will do it." That is how you observe precepts, even without thinking whether you can observe them or not. "I will do it" means "don’t kill animals." You may say so, because originally it is not pos-sible to kill anything. You think you killed, but actually, you cannot. Even though you think you killed, they are still alive [laughs]. Even though you eat something, it is still alive in your body. If something leaves your body, it is still alive.It is not possible for anything to be killed. The only way is to be grateful for everything you have. That is how we keep our precepts without having a dualistic understanding of precepts.
Then you may say, "If so, there will not be any need to have precepts." But unless you are sure, you cannot feel your presence or your being. You do not feel you are alive. You do not have the joy of life or gratitude for everything. You can easily say, "No, I wouldn’t kill anything." But it means that you will not sacrifice yourself for anything. You will be just you. You will not be caught by a dualistic understanding of yourself, and you will feel yourself, as you feel yourself in zazen.
It is rather difficult to explain, but that is actually how we observe precepts. Dogen Zenji said, "Even though we do not try to observe precepts, like a scarecrow [laughs] more evil comes to you." It is strange, when you feel your being in its true sense right here, no evil comes. You cannot violate any precepts, and whatever you do, that is the expression of your true nature. You will not say, "I shouldn’t say that," or "I shouldn’t do that." You will be quite free from that kind of regret or arrogance of observing some special precepts. That is how to observe precepts.
To repeat, precepts are chewing your brown rice [laughs]. Without chewing your brown rice, you cannot eat it. Only when you chew it for a pretty long time will you appreciate the taste of brown rice. When you say, "Oh this is awful! [Laughs] how many times should I chew it before I swallow it down?" that is a very foolish way of eating brown rice. If you say, "Oh, sixteen precepts! Awful to be a Buddhist!" [laughter] Then you have no chance to have a real taste of the Buddhist way. If you observe them one by one, that is how you chew brown rice and how you practice our way.
